
Access to quality education is commonly taken for granted for most students 
living in the United States. I never worry about not having a school to go to, 
a teacher who I can learn from, a book I can read, or a working computer with 
access to the internet. Yet according to Unicef, nearly a quarter of the 
world’s school-aged children (462 million) now live in countries affected by 
crisis.

The Syrian refugee crisis alone has resulted in half of Syrian children (2.8 
million) being out of school with no access to educational opportunities across 
Syria and its neighbouring countries. Today is World Refugee Day and shocking 
statistics like this seem too big to combat. However, I recently learnt about 
an exciting and innovative partnership that is aiming to help change this.

I recently spoke to the team behind this partnership, who brought light to 
those statistics for me and illustrated the need for education in emergencies 
and how Pearson is getting involved to help.

As the world’s leading learning company, Pearson has a social responsibility 
to help improve access to quality education for students around the world. This 
is especially true in conflict and emergency settings. Pearson knows that high 
quality education in such settings provides enormous benefits. Despite all of 
this, I was shocked to discover that education in emergencies and conflicts 
remains the most underfunded of all humanitarian areas. According to Unesco, 
for example, only 2% of global humanitarian aid was allocated to education in 
2014.

While Pearson has experience in developing and delivering educational products 
and services at scale, they have limited on-the-ground experience working in 
conflict-affected areas. However, this did not stop Pearson from wanting to 
tackle the challenge. They know they couldn’t do it alone so last year, they 
formed a partnership with Save the Children who have on-the-ground experience 
working in emergency situations. Through their three-year ‘Every Child 
Learning’ partnership, Pearson and Save the Children aim to increase 
educational opportunities for children affected by the Syria crisis.

The partnership consists of three pillars:

Monetary support 

To meet immediate needs, Pearson donated £500,000 to fund the creation of two 
Save the Children education centres in Amman, Jordan. These centres will help 
to educate more than 1,400 Syrian refugee and host-community children.

Research and innovation of new solutions

Pearson is also investing an additional £1m to work with Save the Children to 
research and develop new solutions to improve the quality of education for 
refugee and host community children in Jordan. This is the phase that the 
partnership is currently in. Pearson recently conducted in-depth field research 
in Jordan to understand education challenges for vulnerable Syrian and 
Jordanian families from their own perspective. Taking an existing educational 
product that Pearson has and moulding it to educate students in conflict would 
not work. These students have very different needs – both academically and 
psychologically – that need to be met by the education solutions developed 
through the partnership.

As a next step, Pearson and Save the Children are now in the early stages of 
using findings from the research to develop digital solutions and programmes to 
improve children’s experience in school and increase learner outcomes. Although 
the pilot is in Jordan, the ambition is that these solutions can then be 
adapted, scaled and replicated in other emergency and conflict-affected 
contexts globally.

Raising awareness of the importance of education in emergencies

Alongside Pearson and Save the Children’s innovation work, they also want to 
combine their voices and raise awareness of the urgency around improving 
education for children affected by conflict. Last month, Pearson and Save the 
Children partnered at the first ever World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul to 
advocate for increased educational access for child refugees.

I believe everyone around the world has the right to a quality education. For 
that reason, I’m really excited to see what solutions and approaches Pearson 
and Save the Children develop that can help children access education when they 
are in an emergency or conflict-affected setting. It will not be an easy task 
and there will be plenty of obstacles to get over on the way, but I can’t think 
of a more deserving challenge to overcome.

Jessica Albright is a Pearson campus student ambassador 
<http://www.pearsoned.com/higher-education/students/get-involved/campus-ambassador-program/>
 studying at Missouri State University. For more information on this 
partnership, please visit the ‘Every Child Learning’ partnership webpage 
<https://www.pearson.com/social-impact/social-innovation/every-child-learning.html>
.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Pearson 
<https://www.pearson.com/>, a sponsor of the Guardian Global Development 
Professionals Network
