
The UK’s PR industry is worth £12.9bn, a 34% rise over the £9.62bn in 2013, 
according to the PR Census 2016 
<http://news.prca.org.uk/pr-census-2016-reveals-that-the-pr-industry-is-worth-129bn/>
.* And it now employs 83,000 people.

This employment finding confirms claims that there are now far more PRs than 
journalists working in Britain.

The Labour Force Survey (LFS) figures for the year up to June 2015 revealed 
that 64,000 people in the UK described themselves as “journalists, newspaper 
and periodical editors”.**

I concede that these are not like-for-like statistics, but the gap is so wide 
that I think the situation is clear.

The PR “industry” is becoming something of a colussus, as Francis Ingham 
director general of the Public Relations Consultants Association (PRCA) 
cheerfully admits. He said: “Our industry is surging ahead, becoming bigger and 
bigger.”

The census also found that the average age of public relations employees is 
just 28 and that 64% of the total are women. As for diversity, 91% are white.

The pay looks attractive compared to that for the majority of journalists, 
with the average PR salary being £45,100 (a decrease, incidentally, on 2013 
when it was found to be £53,781).

And there is a significant disparity - of more than £9,000 - between the wages 
of men and women.

Comment: It is tempting to make a point about there being more people employed 
to tell a story on behalf of their employers than there are people employed to 
hold those employers to account.


But PRs would surely respond by saying that journalists are employed to tell 
stories on behalf of their employers too (look at the papers campaigning one 
way or the other over theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, for example).

In other words, there is a similarity - a moral equivalence perhaps - between 
PRs and journalists.

We cannot deny the partiality of the majority of Britain’s national newspapers 
and that the internal heirarchy ensures that much of the content satisfies the 
wishes of the editors and publishers.

However, journalism benefits from diversity of ownership (and consequent 
plurality of voice) along with intense competition and, it should be said, 
something of a maverick, even anarchic, streak. So, along the way, truths do 
get revealed.

Of course, if media companies go on cutting back on journalism jobs, then it 
does imperil the trade’s ability to get behind the PR facade.


As we have seen, and going back several years, an increasing number of 
newspaper articles rely on PR output and input.

It would be facile to say that PRs lie. But they do narrow the agenda. They do 
shape the information they provide to ensure it gives a positive spin to their 
employer.

Questioning those accounts is a journalist’s job. But are they given enough 
time and space by their publishers to do so? That’s a worrying problem now, and 
a much more crucial one in future, if the disproportionate ratio between 
journalists and PRs continues at its current rate.


*The PR Census 2016 is developed by the PRCA 
<http://news.prca.org.uk/pr-census-2016-reveals-that-the-pr-industry-is-worth-129bn/>
 in conjunction with PRWeek and YouGov. The fieldwork was undertaken between 17 
February and 26 April 2016.


**The Labour Force Survey is based on a quarterly sample of around 100,000 
individuals.
