
The best state sixth forms are outperforming their counterparts in the private 
sector in the teaching of physics, maths and chemistry, but are less successful 
when it comes to teaching humanities and foreign languages.

According to new research <https://www.schooldash.com/blog.html#20160324>, 
pupils who study physics, chemistry and maths at state sixth forms make equally 
good – if not better – progress between GCSE and A-level than their privately 
educated peers.

Private sixth forms, however, perform better in teaching humanities and 
languages, where students make significantly more progress than students in the 
state sector.

The trends are revealed in research by SchoolDash <https://www.schooldash.com/>
, which compares the performance of state and private sixth forms at A-level. 
In terms of results, it concludes that private schools tend to do better than 
state schools by about one grade per student per subject.

Related: Why I'm glad my parents sent me to a state school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/09/why-im-glad-my-parents-sent-me-to-a-state-school>

“However, private schools also start off, on average, with more able 
students,” the research notes. “When we take into account their prior 
attainment by using ‘value-added’ scores instead of raw grades, then at A-level 
this difference drops to more like 0.1 of a grade per student per subject.

“In other words, about 90% of the difference in A-level attainment appears to 
be explained by students’ ability rather than educational effectiveness.”

The most popular subjects at private institutions tend to be traditional 
academic courses, including maths, chemistry, economics and languages, whereas 
state sixth forms have embraced newer subjects such as psychology, sociology 
and media studies.

Nevertheless, in maths, chemistry and physics, state schools are 
over-represented among the best performing schools. Timo Hannay, founder of 
SchoolDash, said: “In physics, maths and chemistry there are subsets of state 
sixth forms that are achieving well above the norms of even the best private 
schools.

“In these subjects, state sixth forms do not merely compete with the best 
private sixth forms, they actually dominate at the top end.”

One possible explanation for their success is that analytical subjects such as 
maths, physics and chemistry, fare better in the context of the state sector’s 
larger class sizes and fewer resources “because it’s possible to do well by 
studying the textbook and doing lots of practice questions”, the researchers 
say.

“In contrast, more discursive subjects [ie humanities] suffer 
disproportionately in such environments because they require students to have 
the eloquence and self-confidence to make arguments on topics that are more 
matters of opinion than of fact.

“Such skills often come only with careful nurturing over a long period of 
time, benefiting from higher levels of teacher attention and extracurricular 
activities such as seminars and debates.”
