
Wow. Oh my God. This is... Sorry, guys... Wow, I’m speechless. I do not know 
how this happened. Why is it me standing here? Because this honour is shared 
with all my fellow nominees – you would be up here if they hadn’t given it to 
me. Well, one of you would. Same with all the amazing people who would totally 
be nominated for one of these fellas if they were actors – you are truly 
extraordinary in your own right, and I say this from the bottom of my heart. 
Above all, I dedicate this award to the family of incredible actors I was 
blessed to work with. Their grace. Their humility. I’ll always remember, um, 
Mer, er, Jen... Look, I’m privileged to count all of you not just as 
inspirational fellow artists who taught me so much, but – I hope I can say this 
– as friends. If I’m here, not you, it’s because of your generosity, your 
commitment, your talent... Your love. Love. All those people around the world 
who love – this is for you. God, I love you guys so much.

There are so many people to thank: the studio, for believing in this 
incredible movie, my entire team, every head of everything – but, most of all, 
our amazing, incredible, brave, passionate, visionary, inspiring, muscular, 
beautiful director. You are unique. Thank you for taking me on this 
unbelievable journey. When people 100 years from now talk about this film, it’s 
because of you. Your wisdom. You are a god. A god I’m proud to call a friend.

Related: Modern tribes: the digital dad 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/20/modern-tribes-digital-new-dad-catherine-bennett>

Finally, I have to mention another wonderful mentor – someone no longer with 
us, who was such a precious part of my dear second cousin on my stepmother’s 
side, Eric’s family. I know you’re up there, Tiddles, my old friend, chasing 
mice through the clouds, and I want you to know I would not be here without 
you. You taught me so much more than I ever taught you. You never said never. 
You were right. To the academy, to all cats, everywhere, this proves that 
dreams can come true. Thank you. I’m speechless.
