
The award-winning journalist whose Newsnight investigation into Jimmy Savile’s 
abuse of children was shelved byBBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
bosses is joining the Bureau of Investigative Journalism.

Meirion Jones has been appointed investigations editor of the non-profit 
organisation, which was forced toapologise 
<https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/2012/11/15/statement-from-the-bureaus-trustees/>
 for its “contribution” to a false report on Newsnight about Lord McAlpine at 
the height of the scandal over Savile.

Jones’ recruitment is part of an expansion drive by the Bureau, which is also 
looking to recruit another four staff. It is looking for senior and junior 
journalists, a production editor and a head of Bureau labs, with the latter 
role funded by Google’s Digital News Initiative.

Bureau editor-in-chief Rachel Oldroyd said Jones’ role would involve reporting 
and overseeing teams working on stories.

She said: “We decided we needed an investigations editor, someone who is 
running the team focused on big impact stories.

“We recruited Meirion because he was the strongest candidate, we’re absolutely 
delighted.”

The Bureau’s story with Newsnight in 2012 alleged that a senior Conservative 
figure had been involved in child abuse in Welsh care homes in the 80s.

Though the programme did not name the person accused, he was identified on 
social media as Lord McAlpine. The story turned out to be false.

Combined with the ongoing scandal over Savile, which included an inquiry into 
the decision over broadcasting Jones’ investigation, the false report led to 
BBC director general George Entwistle standing down. Bureau managing editor 
Iain Overton and the Bureau’s lead journalist Angus Stickler also resigned.

Jones left the BBC in early 2015 and has since been working as a consultant to 
Greenpeace’s investigative journalism unit set up in September last year.

He has won awards for his work on Savile and the Trafigura toxic waste dumping 
story, as well as reporting on stories such as the Olympics cash for gold 
medals scandal and the disenfranchisement of black voters in the 2000 US 
presidential elections.

