
Shortly after publishing UN aid worker Brendan McDonald’s article on mental 
health in the aid sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/31/aid-workers-casualties-mental-health>
 we received many stories from our community. To begin exploring the issue in 
more depth, we are launching a survey for aid workers and development 
professionals.

If you have experienced mental health issues in the sector, or have something 
to say about how they are dealt with by NGOs, then pleaseshare your thoughts 
anonymously in the survey. 
<https://surveys.theguardian.com/R.aspx?a=489&as=Y1u9i6hv56>

Here are some of the stories we’ve heard in the last few months. If you have 
any more you can email us confidentially (see details below).

I was told I was “clearly not committed” to the work

I was working as a director for a major NGO in the Syria crisis. I had been 
there nearly two years, following back-to-back long-term management roles in 
the highest level emergencies since 2010. By the time I submitted my 
resignation, I was so exhausted that I was going to bed every night at 7pm and 
still finding it difficult to get up in the morning.


Related: Steve Dennis: the aid worker suing his NGO 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/15/steve-dennis-aid-worker-suing-his-ngo>

During the course of my work I had been assaulted (twice), sexually harassed 
(so often that I lost count), injured and had my life threatened in the field 
on numerous occasions. I was working long days as we were grossly – and 
unnecessarily – understaffed. When I finally submitted my resignation, citing 
fear of severe burnout and the need to be with family, I was simply told I was 
“clearly not committed” to the work.

When I asked for a referral to a counselling service I was ignored, and then 
sent a bill (I had apparently been ‘overpaid’ for a week). I was swiftly 
replaced by someone with very little experience who wasn’t as vocal as I was. 
I’ve been proactive in getting all the support and time off (all self-funded) 
that I needed to get myself back on track, but I really fear for others in our 
industry who don’t have the luxury, confidence or experience to do the same.


Never work for an organisation without proper security measures

I was young, idealistic, naive and working in an active conflict zone for a 
small local NGO. My local NGO wasn’t big on security regulations: we had none. 
Literally zero.


As one would expect, things went terribly wrong. There was a big attack on the 
city I was living in. Bombs were going off everywhere and all of the other 
expats were being evacuated. My NGO decided that we didn’t need to be 
evacuated. In fact, we were encouraged to continue moving around the city, 
exposing ourselves to great danger for no clear purpose.


I told my organisation that I didn’t feel safe and requested to be allowed to 
evacuate. This request was granted and I was safely removed from the city for a 
week. When I returned and walked back into the office, the front desk secretary 
handed me a copy of an email terminating my employment because, I paraphrase, 
‘I wasn’t sufficiently committed to the cause and violated the organisation’s 
trust in me by evacuating’. The director of the NGO wouldn’t speak to me and I 
was given no recourse or opportunity to file an appeal. I had to beg to stay in 
the apartment I was living in at the time for another night. I had no work 
contract and I had to beg to get a plane ticket out of the country.


On top of the post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) I had (but didn’t take 
care of) I was in a shambles for a long time. It was a horrible experience but 
it did teach me two things: never work for an organisation without proper 
security measures and always get things in writing.


My body gave up. It simply went on strike

After seven years of “field” posts, I finally landed what sounded like a great 
job in New York. But within weeks I realised that staying in Sudan might have 
been a wiser option. My working hours were insane and my work environment was 
toxic. Then after 12 years, five countries and a countless number of sleepless 
nights, my body gave up. It simply went on strike.

Related: Secret aid worker: sexual harassment and discrimination in the 
industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jul/29/secret-aid-worker-sexual-harassment-and-discrimination>

I had physical symptoms that kept me in bed and homebound for several months. 
The diagnosis fell like a bomb: I had a severe form of chronic fatigue syndrome 
caused by stress and burn-out and less than a 20% chance of recovery.

When I could no longer take care of myself, I travelled back to my parents in 
France in a wheelchair. For more than a year my wildest dreams included walking 
or standing for more than 20 minutes, having a restful sleep and breathing 
normally.

My organisation was polite and “electronically” supportive during the sick 
leave. But what made all the difference for me were the great people I met who 
supported me – many people outside my organisation but also within. When it was 
all too overwhelming and I wanted to give up, they were there to help me make 
the right decisions.

My stomach churned at the thought of taking on another assignment

I devoted my life and career to helping those in need all over the world. I 
lived the normal chaos aid workers know so well: of new places, new faces, new 
emergencies. After surviving natural disasters, being shot at, harassed, 
death-threats and diseases with no known names, my body finally gave in and my 
mind was not slow to follow. Returning to my home country, which had not been 
my home in many years, I struggled to find out what was wrong with me. Dumped 
by my agency to fend for myself, my foggy mind and I (a mind that could not 
remember conversations held just moments prior or how to use a parking meter) 
visited numerous specialists for answers.

Finally I was diagnosed with PTSD and malaria complications that had led to 
permanent injuries. I learned I would never bear a child. My life was 
shattered. My stomach churned at the thought of taking on another assignment in 
another emergency, but what else could I do? Being an aid worker was all I 
knew. Today, however, I am CEO of a communications agency in Sweden. It has 
been a long and difficult road of rehabilitation and finding my way to where I 
am today.

I walked into my office and physically collapsed

I was working in Haiti in 2010, during a really dark period post earthquake, 
when we had the cholera outbreak, and then a category four hurricane. I vividly 
remember the day of the hurricane, not least because two hours after it left 
Haitian waters I walked into my office and physically collapsed. My legs just 
would not hold me up.

My head of office sent me home. I was actually convinced I had cholera: I was 
throwing up and feeling really dizzy. To their initial credit, my organisation 
sent me on a week’s emergency leave. After that I came back to Haiti and 
carried on until the end of the year.

But that was just the start. Six months after I left I was experiencing random 
anger, anxiety, crying and exhaustion. I had no idea what was going on. A 
fellow aid worker friend of mine took one look at me and recommended her 
therapist. I was diagnosed with severe burnout. Given I was long gone from my 
contract, I was entitled to nothing at all. It took me more than a year to put 
myself back together.

Eighteen months later and back at work in New York it all came flooding back. 
I found myself unable to concentrate at work and randomly crying a lot. I went 
to see the staff counsellor, but all she was able to do was send me an 
incomprehensible list of US-based therapists. That was it. Most of my 
colleagues just said how lucky I’d been to go to the field.

Related: Secret aid worker: development work broke a piece of me 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/04/secret-aid-worker-development-work-broke-a-piece-of-me>

I feel guilty about saying I need a long break

After nine months in Bentiu, South Sudan, it took me almost two months to 
realise how burnt out I was. I was lucky that I was around an amazing 
therapist, who saw straight away what I was going through. I’m not much of a 
talker so what I loved was that she gave me very concrete exercises to do 
myself.

People are starting to ask me about my next move, next mission and I do feel 
guilty about saying I need a long break. When I see people going from mission 
to mission it does make me feel like a “bad humanitarian” – somehow not strong 
enough or not having what it takes, apparently. I’m even reconsidering my whole 
career.


Share your thoughts on mental health and wellbeing in our survey here 
<https://surveys.theguardian.com/R.aspx?a=489&as=Y1u9i6hv56>. All contributions 
are confidential.

The Guardian Global Development Professionals Network will be exploring the 
issue of mental health and wellbeing in the aid industry over the next few 
months. If you have a story to share, particularly if you have experience 
reporting incidents to your employer, email globaldevpros@theguardian.com with 
‘Wellbeing’ in the subject line.

 * If you have been affected by the stories in this article, the
 Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 in the UK 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you/contact-us>. If you live outside 
the UK, a list of organisations providing support internationallycan be found 
here 
<http://in2mentalhealth.com/2011/06/23/50-mental-health-ngosuser-organizations-around-the-world/>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
