
The dilemma My boyfriend can’t say “I love you”. He says it will take time. 
We’ve been going out for a year and a half. For him actions speak louder than 
words. But he slept with another woman while drunk and travelling six months 
ago. He was very sorry, and we worked through it and re-established trust and 
connection. I appreciate his honesty, but at times feel angry. He says that 
though he felt more lustful passion towards past girlfriends, we have a better 
chance of staying together because the relationship is not based on superficial 
unrealistic lust but instead care, fun, respect and growing together. We talk 
about marriage and babies. I’d like to move in with him, but he’s not ready 
yet. I’m starting to read this as a sign that he’s not committed to me. Is it 
normal to have some doubts about a relationship?

Mariella replies What a catch! Seriously, I’d be having doubts, too. There’s 
little in your description that suggests to me that he’s in for the long haul. 
Rationing your allowance when it comes to commitment and desire is hardly the 
stuff of epic romance. Instead he seems to be doing everything in his power to 
keep you at arm’s length and in return you’re, what… grateful? I know a good 
man is hard to find, or certainly was in my searching days, but that doesn’t 
mean you should settle for slim pickings from the outset.Relationships 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/relationships> in the long term may be 
all about compromise, but in the short term they should deliver satisfaction 
and joy, not self-doubt.

Duty sex can be saved for later, when you’ll need to learn the art of creating 
passion rather than being propelled by it

There’s a degree of arrogance about his assumption that your desire to be with 
him should exceed your wish to be desired. Why should you be compromising? 
Nothing about your feelings sounds superficial: you want love, marriage and 
children, and after 18 months he can’t even declare the first one. Unrealistic 
lust is a great place to kick off – duty sex can always be saved for later, 
when you’ll need to learn the art of creating passion rather than being 
propelled by it. Contrary to his declarations, there’s nothing unrealistic 
about lust – the desire for a fellow human being is about as real an expression 
of human nature as you can get. There is little sense, at the start of a 
relationship, in compromising on something so fundamental to harmonious 
cohabitation. A pragmatic approach to a long-term relationship may be sensible, 
but only when that sense of compromise toward a greater goal is evenly 
distributed and shared rather than dictated by one partner.

You seem to be putting all your eggs in a basket with a big hole in it. Your 
letter indicates a puzzling degree of gratitude towards this man for 
entertaining the prospect of you as a partner. A relationship isn’t an audition 
for future employment. It’s a “here and now, every breath could be your last, 
let’s make the most of it” situation. For most couples the first few years are 
often the best, when passion is high, love is blind and the rest of the world 
barely comes into focus most days. Instead, here you are, ploughing through the 
mire, accepting the parameters he’s creating and living entirely on his terms. 
I really think you can do better. You say for him that actions speak louder 
than words – a statement that answers most of your questions. I’m all for care, 
fun and respect, but with a healthy dose of lustful passion expressed within 
the partnership. Telling someone they are good enough is an assertion of power, 
not a declaration of affection.

He’s not ready to say he loves you, he’s not ready to move in, and a year into 
your relationship not only has he betrayed you but he’s also landed a double 
whammy by insinuating that he’s prepared to sacrifice such irresistible passion 
(with you) for the sake of potential future contentment.

As I suspect you already know (and have just written to me seeking 
confirmation), this guy isn’t worth your investment. It’s not easy walking away 
from someone you have feelings for. It’s even harder, though, to recover from a 
relationship you have put your heart into only to have it returned to you in 
smithereens. This guy might wake up one morning and realise what he’s got, but 
I certainly wouldn’t hang around waiting for that day to dawn. I suspect that 
if you stopped letting him define the terms of your union and started making 
some non-negotiable demands yourself, you’d see some changes.

It sounds like he’s coasting, and there are only two ways to snap him out of 
his reverie: start making your own desires your priority or simply wave him 
farewell. That might sound unbearably painful to you at present, and not a 
situation you’d want to precipitate, but it will be more agony-inducing to 
squander more good years waiting for him to say the hardest easy sentence in 
the world. “I love you” marks the point where a real relationship begins, from 
where it grows and flourishes, and you certainly have the right to start from 
there and ask for more.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
