
What have we learned about David Cameron today?

An unofficial biography of David Cameron written by the Conservative donor 
Lord Ashcroft <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-ashcroft> contains a 
series of allegations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-pig-head-lord-ashcroft-unofficial-biography-drug-taking-claims>
. They include that the prime minister spent time in a drug-taking environment 
at university, that he took part in a bizarre dinner club initiation ritual, 
and another claim about Cameron’s knowledge of the peer’s offshore tax status.

One specific allegation is that, in the words of the Daily Mail, Cameron took 
part in an initiation ceremony in which he “put a private part of his anatomy” 
into a dead pig’s mouth. It cites a source – a current MP – who claims to have 
seen photographic evidence. It allegedly took place at a notorious Oxford 
University drinking club, the Piers Gaveston Society.

Related: From #piggate to #Hameron: how Twitter reacted to David Cameron claims
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/piggate-hameron-twitter-react-david-cameron-pig-head-claims>

Downing Street has declined to comment on the book but a Conservative source 
said No 10 did not recognise any of the allegations made on the front page of 
the Daily Mail.

What is the Piers Gaveston Society?

“Piers Gav” is highly exclusive, made up of a self-selecting group of 12 
undergraduates. The men-only club, named after the alleged male lover of Edward 
II, king of England from 1307 to 1327, was founded in 1977 and carries the 
motto: “Fane non memini ne audisse unum alterum ita dilixisse.” It translates 
to:

Truly, none remember hearing of a man enjoying another so much.

The Mail reports that the club encourages “excess, high camp [and] 
ostentatious decadence”.

Piers Gaveston members are understood to be given obscure titles such as 
“Poker”, “Despenser” and “Catamite”, and they all follow the Sicilian code of
Omertà – or maintaining silence about the club. In fact, it prides itself on 
being a clandestine organisation.

What do people say about it?

Valentine Guinness, one of the founders of the society, once told the 
journalist Toby Young that the appearance of Piers Gav and other similar 
societies in the 70s “was a conscious effort to say, look, you know, the 
country may be in a mess but we’re still going to have a good time”.

And so they do. For its summer ball, members each invite 20 guests – 
preferably more women than men, who were last year given 72 hours’ notice, when 
they were told to turn up for a hired coach that would drive them to an 
undisclosed destination in the countryside. “Cross-dressing is as likely to 
feature as speed-laced jelly,” says the Telegraph of these parties. “The rules 
are simple – there are none.”

Related: Cameron biography: Ashcroft makes new debauchery claims about student 
days 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/21/david-cameron-pig-head-lord-ashcroft-unofficial-biography-drug-taking-claims>

The journalist Danny Kemp went to the Piers Gaveston ball in summer 1995. He 
has a different take on the club. “I guess the first thing to say is that it 
really wasn’t very debauched,” he said. “I was invited by a friend of a friend 
who was in the Piers Gaveston Society. The most obvious thing is that it is 
meant to be raunchy fancy dress. This means a lot of people going in drag 
[myself included unfortunately], others in what back then looked like 
bondage-type gear.

“Invitees were told to gather in a central Oxford location, where a coach 
picked everyone up and drove them to a location in a field on the outskirts of 
the city. There was a big marquee in the field, with what was again meant to 
look like louche decor, velvet, etc, and bowls of free punch to drink. I think 
they had some kind of burlesque-type dancing on a stage, but it was mainly just 
90s house, techno and people dancing, in drag.

“I was expecting it to be a bit more interesting than it was. And, really, 
that was it. No pigs’ heads. The whole thing really seemed like 
not-terribly-debauched public schoolboys’ idea of debauchery.”

The broadcaster Julia Hartley-Brewer went to Piers Gaveston parties in 
1989-91. She said they were “just big, fairly wild parties. Lots of drink, lots 
of very rich posh kids getting wasted – probably lots of drugs [but not my 
thing so I wouldn’t know]. They were fun bashes – very hot and sweaty and very 
much about getting off with people.”

Jules Evans, author of Philosophy for Life: And Other Dangerous Situations and 
policy director at Queen Mary’s Centre for History of Emotions, was a member of 
Piers Gaveston in 1997. He said it was not a secret society, rather just a club 
that organised a summer party. “They were pretty innocuous – basically a fancy 
dress rave. Not nearly as decadent as the media or the participants themselves 
liked to think. Didn’t stop the Sun sending a reporter and photographer and 
calling it an ‘orgy’,” he said.

What’s the difference between Piers Gaveston and the Bullingdon Club?

The Bullingdon Club is the other drinking society Cameron was known to be a 
member of. Most of the sonorous members of the Bullingdon are old Etonians. The 
prime minister was one such member, as was the London mayor, Boris Johnson.

They wore a bespoke uniform of tailcoats, waistcoats and bow ties, which could 
cost thousands of pounds, making membership difficult for ordinary students. 
One MP who was once asked to join the club said he walked out of a gathering in 
disgust. “What it basically involved was getting drunk and standing on 
restaurant tables, shouting about ‘f***ing plebs’. It was all about despising 
poor people,” he told the Daily Mail of the scene reminiscent of film The Riot 
Club, based on Laura Wade’s play Posh.

There is no evidence that Cameron, Osborne or Johnson were involved in the 
excesses described by the MP.

The Bullingdon is still banned from meeting within a 15-mile radius of Christ 
Church after members smashed 400 windows at the college in 1927. When Evelyn 
Waugh published his novel Decline and Fall the following year, he probably did 
not expect Oxford’s secret drinking club the Bullingdon, or Bollinger as it is 
satirised in the book, to still be filling headlines in decades to come.

For Waugh, the club consisted of “epileptic royalty from their villas of 
exile; uncouth peers from crumbling country seats; smooth young men of 
uncertain tastes from embassies and legations; illiterate lairds from wet 
granite hovels in the Highlands; ambitious young barristers and Conservative 
candidates torn from the London season and the indelicate advances of 
debutantes; all that was most sonorous of name and title”.


