
A week is a long time in politics: consider two years and two months, the 
maximum arguing time left before that European referendum. Leave? Remain? 
Stick? Twist? Yawn? In one sense, it’s an unequal fight for the dailies. Who’ll 
vote Remain? Probably only theIndy, Guardian, FT and Mirror: total circulation 
not much over 1.35 million, while the Leavers command five million or more. 
Duck for cover once theExpress, Mail, Times, Telegraph, Star and Bun start 
booming away. Yet time, passing, raises some interesting calculations.

Let’s assume the Remain four won’t change position – their views don’t really 
hang on what David Cameron brings back from Brussels. The Leave squad, by 
contrast, have some human and temporal problems to confront.Richard Desmond 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> is trying to sell his Express
 titles and maybe his Star ones at a suitable profit. There have been talks 
with Trinity Mirror. Would Trinity, say, be keen on a full-throated Leave 
campaign if itsMirror titles were crying Remain? It is, at least, an open 
question.

That open condition also applies to those twin titans of Euroscepticism, Paul 
Dacre andRupert Murdoch <http://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch>. 
Dacre’sMail, on last week’s belligerent form, looks certain to lead the Leave 
legions. But Dacre is 67 next month. Is theMail itself, in history and by 
conviction, wedded to Brussels scepticism? It wasn’t when David English was 
editor (and mentor of Dacre). Vere Harmsworth, the present Viscount 
Rothermere’s dad, sat on the cross benches in the Lords.

There’s no certainty that every jot of Mail policy would survive a change of 
editor, any more than there is that Rupert Murdoch, 84, will still be pulling 
the old levers of hostility as Sky TV marches across Europe. News UK is these 
days less a personal fiefdom and more a conventional business, full of 
corporate circumspection.

Business is business: as it is for Aidan Barclay at the Telegraph, whose 
social circle revolves around (big) business chums of the bank/retailer/ 
developer kind. Why put that at risk if there’s a reasonable escape hatch? Why, 
especially, bet theTelegraph position as supreme Conservative supporter if 
you’re likely to wreck your best-beloved in the process? In short, there is 
time – loads of time – for things to change. And, with renegotiation still 
pending, just factor in our old chum fudge and mudge, and a visceral debate 
turns suddenly bland.
