
I was a creative child who loved art but was raised to believe academic 
success was the only option. I worked hard and got a masters in HR, then worked 
my way up to becoming the HR manager of a multinational. I had a good boss and 
my job was interesting but it had a very negative side to it – listening to 
grievances, sacking people, redundancies (once, in the week before Christmas, I 
had people crying in my office). In HR you are a mouthpiece for bad news.

I had been making birthday cakes as a hobby and became more and more obsessive 
about cake decorating, spending hours of my free time looking at cakes on 
Pinterest and learning new skills. I dreamed of giving up my job to start a 
cake-making business but I was earning good money in HR. The thought of risking 
the mortgage and potentially leaving my husband and child homeless didn’t feel 
worth it.

When I became pregnant with my second child I took a year’s maternity leave 
and while I was off I made some dummy wedding cakes to show at a wedding fair. 
I reasoned that if it were a disaster I could go back to the office and no one 
would know. But to my delight and amazement the orders came rolling in. When my 
maternity leave came to an end, I had zero motivation to return to work. I kept 
imagining myself as an old lady, thinking “what if?” I resigned and within a 
month I was fully booked for the summer wedding season.

I had to get into debt to start the business which was really scary but I’ve 
made a profit in year one and next year is looking good too.

I work from home so I have minimal overheads, I can always do the school run 
and I save a fortune on childcare. I’m lucky that my husband is a taxi driver 
and his flexible hours and moral support have been invaluable. Having no mentor 
can be stressful – I have to learn from my own mistakes. The work contains a 
lot of sugarcraft, which can take days. It’s out of the question that I would 
let someone down on their big day, so there have been times I’ve had to sit up 
all night working.

Overall I’ve never been less stressed or happier. I don’t have a pension or 
sick pay but I have quality of life now. People told me this was nothing but a 
pipe dream and that I’d never be able to make it work. For a long time, I was 
held back by a lack of confidence. Once I finally made the jump, I wished I’d 
done it years ago. Breaking from conformity and expressing myself creatively 
has brought me a sense of freedom I didn’t realise I was missing.

rosewoodcakes.com <http://rosewoodcakes.com/portfolio.html>
