 I come in for a lot of mostly good-natured reproach and ridicule for talking 
about dying. This is considered to be somehow sick or morbid. Death has 
replaced sex as the forbidden subject.
Curiously enough, my own feelings about death were finally crystallised in an 
unlikely suicide attempt. Pretty well everyone, I should imagine, has at one 
time or another envisaged the possibility of suicide, but as between the person 
who actually pulls it off and all the various degrees of attempting and 
failing, there is a wide chasm.

How serious was my intention? It is impossible to say, especially as there was 
the complication of my being at the time, as a wartime counter-intelligence 
agent, engaged in a ludicrous espionage charade in to which an attempted 
suicide fitted rather well. For fugitives from themselves espionage is a more 
effective recourse than even marijuana or LSD, which may help to account for 
the popularity today of spies and spying, in fiction and in life.

The fact is, anyway, that on a sultry, steamy African night, with a good deal 
of stale booze washing about inside me, and a stronger than usual sense of the 
futility of most human endeavour, especially the fringe activities in waging a 
war, I decided to make a once-for-all exit by swimming out to sea and never 
coming back.

I cannot remember feeling particularly het up as I drove to a remote beach; I 
left no notes to anyone because I calculated that, as a known inveterate bather 
at all hours of the day and night, my death would be assumed to have been 
accidental. It just seemed a rather ordinary, sensible thing that I was doing; 
like taking a suit to the cleaners or extricating oneself from a sleeping 
embrace; slipping away, softly shutting the door behind one, and treading alone 
the grey dawn pavement outside.

It was a very low tide that night, and I had to wade, as it seemed, for miles 
and miles, through soft, dark mud before the water even came up to my waist. 
There is always an intrinsic absurdity in any theatrical act or gesture, and, 
if anyone had seen me, I must have looked quite ridiculous as, naked and muddy, 
I made my way so laboriously to the sea.

The water, when at last I began to swim was tepid and treacly, with heavy 
moonlight falling leadenly upon it. There were sharks about as I well knew, but 
in the circumstances it seemed foolish to give them a thought. I swam on and on 
until I began to feel drowsy; a precondition of drowning, as I had read 
somewhere. A rather nice end, I decided - falling asleep in the sea.

Then I decided to have one last look at the shore and turned over on my back 
for the purpose. How very far away it seemed! I could just see the lights of a 
café I had sometimes been to, kept by a Greek; called Peter's Café or some such 
name. The place was always ready to stay open indefinitely as long as there 
were customers buying drinks. So there must be someone there, I decided; easily 
imagining the scene - the scruffy waiter half asleep, a party of drinkers out 
on the terrace overlooking the sea, maybe playing dice or cards, Peter the 
Greek himself seated stonily behind the bar.

It was these drinkers, the rattle of their dice, their screwed up eyes as they 
looked at their cards, Peter's hard, avaricious face, that beckoned me back. I 
realised with a kind of ecstasy that the earth was my home, and they and all 
men my fellow internees. The wonderful sleep I had almost fallen into would 
come later. It was something to look forward to - as Bakunin's sister put it to 
him on her deathbed: 'It's lovely to die, Michael; to stretch oneself out.' 
Words I have often said over to myself.

As I struggled back to shore, fighting off the somnolence and weariness now 
instead of surrendering to them, I felt great joy at returning. It was a joyous 
homecoming; even after I had finished with the water and was struggling, 
exhausted, through that seemingly endless waste of black, soft mud. 
Thenceforth, I have never doubted that every life must be lived out to the end, 
just as King Lear must be played to the end; that to interrupt or terminate the 
performance is to rob it of its point.

The following day, to cover myself, I cyphered off an account of what had 
happened as though it had been a carefully planned and executed Intelligence 
stratagem. Back in London, my report went first to Graham Greene, who, with his 
novelist's eye, saw at once that I was covering up for life with a legend. The 
head of the department, Kim Philby, on the other hand, readily accepted the 
legend, being even then engaged, as we now know, in spinning his own infinitely 
more variegated one. Truly, fiction is stranger than fact.

It is difficult today, without appearing a humbug or a fool, to explain that 
death is neither a misery to be evaded, a fate to be dreaded, nor an outrage to 
be endured, but a joy to be welcomed. That each moment of life, whatever the 
circumstances, is made more precious because it passes. That it is precisely 
because we die that living is so wonderful a gift - whether for a minute or a 
full lifetime, sick or well, crazed or serene, in pain or in delight, no 
matter; still wonderful.

As I write these words I look out of my window at a wintry landscape. Yet I 
know that already the earth is stirring, buds pushing out. Soon it will be 
spring. One more spring, and then another. For me, not so many now. Maybe 10, 
maybe not even one. Thinking so, the bare twigs seem to glow with an inward 
light and the bare earth to shine visibly with the promise of fruitfulness, and 
Donne's splendid words ring in my ears - Death, thou shalt die.
