
BBC director general Tony Hall <http://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-hall> 
has ruled out ever running online ads in the UK, saying it would harm other 
digital businesses that rely on ads.

During a special session of the public accounts committee, Labour MP Caroline 
Flint asked Hall “when it comes to an online formats, isn’t there a stream of 
advertising revenue in the future?”.

Hall replied by saying advertising in the UK would harm the country’s broader 
broadcasting and news ecosystem.

“We have a good ecology in this country, ITV and Channel 4 are doing public 
service broadcasting but funded by ads, and Sky has subscribers. That kind of 
works and I don’t think it is for us to get into the advertising market,” he 
said.


Related: BBC climbdown over online recipes after public outcry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/17/bbc-climbdown-over-online-recipes-after-public-outcry>

Pressed again by Flint, who said online ads had less “qualitative” impact on 
digital news and information than in TV or radio, he said it would be going 
back on promises to commercial providers.

“The problem is if we started taking advertising online, we would be doing 
something we said we won’t do,” he said. “There are others out there whose 
funding model – we are privileged to be funded by license fee – there are 
others who are trying to do other jobs in information and all sorts of other 
ways funded by advertising and I wouldn’t want to harm their market; and they 
sometimes think we do harm their market.”

Newspapers and other digital publishers have regularly complained that the 
BBC’s digital services compete for the attention of online audiences, depriving 
them of advertising revenue when spending on print ads is in decline.

Hall’s commitment comes just a week after the BBC caused an outcry with plans 
to close its BBC Food website and “mothball” thousands of recipes, before later 
saying the bulk of the content would be quickly moved to the BBC Good Food 
website, which is owned by commercial armBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Worldwide and runs ads.

Despite ruling out advertsing on BBC services in the UK, Hall said it was 
right to have them on output outside the UK, such as the World Service
