
I was diagnosed with HIV in 1994, a time of moral panic about the condition. 
The stigma I had internalised about HIV, combined with that of sex and 
sexuality, made me to hide the diagnosis from family and friends for six years. 
Consequently, and despite physically managing the condition well with 
antiretroviral medications, I have battled with depression since. While in 
mental health recovery, I realised I wanted to work in a helping profession and 
qualified as a social worker in 2010.


I won’t be the first person from a disadvantaged group who has been motivated 
to do social work. But having worked in a range of adult health settings since 
qualifying, it has failed to satisfy me, so in July 2015 I foundedLive HIV 
Neutral <https://www.facebook.com/LiveHIVNeutral/> – an activists’ working 
network. Its focus is challenging HIV stigma and it aims to broaden the 
dialogue about HIV prevention to the mainstream arena; only in such forums will 
stigma be overcome. It is closer to the type of work that inspired me to become 
a social worker in that it aims to bring about change in society. As the job 
did not exist, I had to create it. It is unpaid, so I manage it alongside my 
day job in adult social care.

Related: My job in palliative care let me practise social work as it is meant 
to be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/13/palliative-care-social-work>

Many people ask me why I want to do unpaid activism on top of a stressful job 
in statutory adult services. The honest response is that if I only did the paid 
work, I would probably no longer be a social worker. The ever-narrowing 
definition of social work to include primarily legally indicated tasks, such as 
safeguarding adult investigations and best interests assessments, is not 
enjoyable. There is little emotional succour in this work, so I try to redress 
the balance elsewhere. The faultline between social work and community work is 
debatable. But, to me, this activism feels more like social work. It is what 
makes the day job bearable.

The shift from traditional social work roles toward a more refined definition 
of tasks was catalysed by a desire to define the professionalism of the sector. 
There is certainly a need to distinguish between social work and other 
professions. But I am uncertain whether it’s wise or possible to draw clear 
lines between social work and community work. I consider much of third sector 
activity to be social work, which is shown by the growing dependence of social 
services on this sector to provide essential services: for instance, adult 
social care’s working relationships with Age UK and carer’s centres.

Live HIV Neutral aims to empower people to make changes in their lives, to 
live free from discrimination and oppression, and to have an equal voice in 
society. If that is not a social work role then I am not a social worker. And 
there is a dire need for community capacity building in this area at a time of 
harsh local authority cuts. HIV services are linked to sexual health services 
and these remain the responsibility of local authorities in England. Many 
people fear losing essential resources as ill-informed commissioners decide the 
future of services they do not understand.

Further local authority cuts are inevitable. Rather than directly fighting 
them, I believe it is time for HIV and other blood-borne viruses, such as 
hepatitis C, to be redefined as the responsibility of theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. This would ensure essential health 
services are funded from budgets with more protection. In addition, it would 
contribute to challenging stigma. Not everyone who has HIV or hepatitis C got 
it through sex. And many people who did acquire infections via sex report the 
experience of attending sexual health clinics as oppressive. Some people with 
HIV choose to abstain from sex rather than negotiate relationships, yet when 
they attend blood tests they are routinely asked how many sexual partners they 
have had.


Related: I loved social work, until stories of despair and addiction got to me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/22/burnout-social-work-despair-addiction>

Another casualty of the cuts in many regions is HIV specialist social worker 
posts. This is concerning many people who have relied on this specialism to 
overcome the stigma they face. The cut means social workers in generic care 
teams are now engaging with people with HIV. This risks people with a lack of 
specialist knowledge trying to negotiate a stigmatised health condition.


I don’t doubt that some people will say things in ways that others experience 
as stigmatising. But, despite this, enabling a wider social work cohort to 
develop knowledge about HIV is a good thing. As people with HIV age and manage 
co-morbidities such as strokes or diabetes, this knowledge base will 
increasingly be secondary to another specialisms. Perhaps it is via the 
education of a wider health and care cohort that HIV stigma will begin to be 
challenged in these professions, in a similar way as we have seen with mental 
health stigma.

And that is where the network comes in. We aim to take the conversation about 
HIV beyond the bubble of the HIV sector. We want mainstream organisations, such 
as the NHS and social services departments, to consider how they can become HIV 
neutral in their activities. As a social worker in an integrated health and 
care landscape, this is the challenge I need to take on. So we have developed 
the Live HIV Neutral pledge and, for World Aids Day 2016, we want to see 
organisations taking the pledge and telling society what living HIV neutral 
means to them. We do not want symbolism, we want meaningful action.

Nathan Fox is the founder of Live HIV Neutral, and tweets on @livehivneutral 
<https://twitter.com/livehivneutral>

The Social Life Blog 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written by 
people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
