
'Where the bee sucks, there suck I" - that's how I think of my delicate 
sampling as I trundle around the country from product to producer. I can no 
longer fit into a cowslip's bell, but the general theory is sound. It's a sip 
(or a suck) here and a nibble there, along with chats with the folk who grow or 
pick or make or sell or something. I come across shops that do a special job, 
too. Here are five that have given me particular pleasure:

William's Kitchen

It is a wonder to find a cracking good fishmonger so far from the sea. In 
fact, you'd be hard pressed to find fish as good slap-bang on the beach. And I 
love William's Kitchen in particular because its proprietor, William Beeston, 
is a man of fishy passions. He can't resist putting the odd mega-fish on 
display - fish of the quality that normally turn up only in restaurants. The 
other day he had a John Dory the size of a buckler beside a sea bass the length 
of a cricket bat. It was all I could do not to buy both. There's plenty of 
non-fishy stuff, too, plus an oyster bar for lunchtime snacks and a proper 
restaurant on Friday and Saturday evenings. Hurrah for Nailsworth.

Ibbotson's

I came across Ibbotson's quite by accident. It's a kind of dream village shop: 
small and so packed with produce that you can hardly turn around without 
sending a packet of biscuits or a display of chocolates crashing to the floor. 
But they are local biscuits and chocolate, to go alongside the local pies, 
pasties, fruit and veg. Not to mention their very own, prestige-class pickled 
onions. It's not all bespoke local stuff, though. "Have you got any taleggio?" 
I heard one customer ask. "No, but the reblochon's just right," said the 
ebullient Katheryn, who owns and runs the place with her husband, Ken (and 
Karen and Wendy and Di and Jenny). What with Harrogate toffee, mint humbugs, 
butter and cream from the Peak District, Raineri olive oil and Seggiano raw 
artichoke paste, there's something for everyone.

Gabriel Machin

When I visit my mother in Henley, I often pop to Waitrose to replenish her 
fridge and store cupboard, and then, having bought the boring essentials, 
indulge myself by sauntering along to Gabriel Machin, the town's last surviving 
butcher, purveyor of top-grade local meats, game, fish and, above all, smoked 
products. Rarely do I leave without a packet of bacon, some salmon, eel, 
halibut and other goodies, all lovingly cured out the back.

The Gazzano's

I was rather concerned a few years back when Gazzano metamorphosed from a 
crowded, pleasantly old-fashioned Italian deli into a modish, iron-clad Italian 
deli. Would it lose its heart and soul, and, more important, the uniform high 
standard of its salumi, cheese, bread and oil, and the charm with which they 
were served. I need not have worried. Gazzano's has served the Italian 
community in London for more than 100 years. The latest generation have given 
the family business new impetus without losing the professionalism and warmth 
of past generations. The secret is to have a large enough turnover to make sure 
all the produce is fresh.

Valvona & Crolla

Does V&C need any further rave notices? It has been an Edinburgh institution 
for so long, but, well, why not. I was reminded just how fabulous this shop 
would be anywhere in the world when I went for a book signing the other day. 
Impeccable produce, sourced with a very keen palate, displayed with unnerving 
generosity, genial service, fabulous wine section, zippy cafe - this place is 
the dog's family jewels when it comes to food shopping.
