
The world economy is in meltdown. Don't panic! I'm a bit of a financial 
expert. The idea here is to "right the ship", restore the economy to that 
lovely, functioning place it was, oh, a week ago, when the rich could be 
counted on to get reliably richer and the poor to go down down down, whereas 
now, everyone is going down together. Soon the only status question will be 
whose cardboard box has the least amount of phlegm on it.

The problem began with something called a "sub-prime mortgage" - ie, a 
mortgage given to someone who should not, based on income and/or credit 
history, be given a mortgage, and so we have to charge him extra for one. Some 
might say: wouldn't we expect such people to default? Yes, exactly - that's the 
beauty of it. We then invented the idea of "bundling" thousands of sub-prime 
loans and reselling them as investment instruments, essentially betting on the 
question: "How many of those poor, irresponsible, and/or scamming people, who 
shouldn't have had loans in the first place, and are hence paying extra, will 
fail to repay them?" (It is my understanding that these were not physical 
bundles, wrapped in big rubber bands or something. No, they were metaphorical 
bundles of nebulous value. They weighed nothing, like a ghost, or the human 
soul.) Then the economy took a downturn, and these people began defaulting on 
their nebulous metaphorical loans faster than we expected. Leave it to the poor 
to mess up a good thing.

Soon, our nebulous metaphorical bundles were, as well as vaporous, worthless. 
But by then they had been used to buy other things: stocks, bonds, other banks, 
Ferraris. These so-called "toxic assets" crept outward, virally, infecting the 
entire system in such a complicated pattern that no one knows how widespread 
the effects are. Even a million monkeys, given room-sized supercomputers and 
infinite time, could never map its intricacies, plus just think of the cost in 
bananas alone.

Which is where the federal government comes in. The treasury department has 
proposed a huge bailout - perhaps a trillion dollars, as of this writing - to 
solve this problem too complicated for a million monkeys, via a complicated 
process called: buying any crappy old thing anyone has to sell us, no questions 
asked.

Is it possible to solve a problem too complicated to understand? It had better 
be. As for us financial experts: not to worry. Most of us have moved on to 
investment firms other than the ones we destroyed, and others expect to find 
work advising the federal government on how to extract itself from this world 
financial meltdown. We're resilient like that.
