
What did the chancellor say about the impact of changes to the minimum wage 
and tax credit cuts unveiled in his post-election budget?

Here is what George Osborne <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>
 said when he was interviewed on the BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday 
morning: “The typical family with someone working full-time on the minimum wage 
will be better off, not just a little bit better off but £2,000 a year better 
off, if you include the lower taxes we are providing through the personal 
allowance; the childcare for three and four-year-olds. That family is 
supported.” He also said nine in 10 families would be better off once the whole 
budget was considered.

Is that claim contested?

The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) and the Resolution Foundation say the 
welfare cuts in Osborne’s summer budget will leave some of Britain’s poorest 
families £1,300 a year worse off.


So how did the chancellor come to that conclusion?

By throwing in everything and by blurring the distinction between those 
gaining and losing from the changes. In the budget red book, published on 
budget day, the Treasury said: “Taking the welfare changes together with the 
introduction of the national living wage and record increases in the income tax 
personal allowance, this will mean eight out of 10 working households will be 
better off in 2017-18 by an average of £130. A couple over 25 working full-time 
on the national minimum wage who benefit from the national living wage, with 
two children, will take home a higher net income than they did in 2015-16.”

What do other experts say?

Paul Johnson, director of the IFS, said at the time of the budget that the 
government’s claims did not stack up. He made two points: the first is that the 
people who benefit from a higher national minimum wage are unlikely to be the 
same people who will lose from less generous tax credits. Many of the gainers 
are single, childless or married to someone on higher earnings, and so will not 
be affected by welfare cuts.

The second point was that the cost of the national minimum wage (£4bn) coupled 
with increases in the personal tax allowance (£1.2bn in 2016-17) and childcare 
for three and four-year-olds (£365m) did not nearly match the £12bn the 
Treasury is saving from cutting the welfare bill. He said: “Unequivocally, tax 
credit recipients in work will be made worse off by the measures in the budget 
on average.”

How did the IFS make its calculations?

The IFS said that by the end of the parliament somebody in work and claiming 
benefits and tax credits would have lost £750 from the welfare cuts, but gained 
£200 a year from the national living wage, leaving them £550 worse off.

Resolution Foundation analysis shows that a working family, where one works 
full-time (35 hours) and the other part-time (20 hours)– both on the minimum 
wage – will get a £1,100 pay rise in 2016 as a result of the “national living 
wage”. But they will still find themselves £1,800 worse off overall because of 
cuts to in-work support. They will also find it hard to earn more to recover 
their loss in income as they will keep only 20p of each additional pound they 
earn.


 The analysis also shows that a low-earning single parent working full-time on 
the minimum wage will get a £700 pay rise in 2016 as a result of the national 
living wage, but will still find themselves £1,500 short because of cuts to 
in-work support.
