
The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, said polling the party’s 
members to help shape policy is here to stay as he marked his first 100 days in 
office.


Corbyn said consulting members would continue after he used the method to show 
support for his stance on Syria, adding: “Politics better get used to the idea”.

He also criticised MPs who applauded the speech of Hilary Benn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/hilarybenn>, the shadow foreign secretary, 
on the Syria airstrikes, saying it was inappropriate. “I did not agree with it. 
I was appalled that MPs should clap, shout and cheer when we were deciding to 
go and bomb somewhere. Parliament is supposed to be serious. It’s not a place 
for jingoistic cheering,” he said.

Amid a persistent gulf between some Labour MPs and their leadership, Corbyn 
made clear he is planning more polls of the membership in an interview with the
Huffington Post <http://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post>. He 
acknowledged there were some administrative problems with analysing the 
responses of members on the Syria vote – which showed 75% supported his 
position – but defended the idea of consulting members.

Labour MPs, such as John Woodcock, the pro-airstrike former chair of the New 
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> pressure group Progress, 
criticised the method and timing of the survey as “not credible”, arguing it 
excluded some members, especially those not active on social media.

But Corbyn said: “I hope that had an influence on what Labour MPs were 
thinking, I hope that had an influence on public opinion. I don’t apologise for 
that, I think it’s the right thing to do. And it’s something I will do again.” 
He said polling could be used to help form policy on Trident if a way could be 
found of analysing nuanced replies and managing the volume of responses.

But Angela Eagle <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, the 
shadow business secretary, who is leader of the party’s national policy form, 
sounded cool on Sunday about suggestions that the influence of members was 
being increased. She said Labour needed to allow members into the 
policy-forming process but that members of the wider public should also be 
involved.

She told the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show: “We don’t make policy by plebiscite 
because there are very few policies that have clear, black and white, yes or no 
answers in a complex world. What we need to have is debate and decision-making 
after everybody has been listened to, democratically arrived at through the 
policy processes.”

Eagle also said she disagreed with Corbyn about the MPs who applauded Benn’s 
speech in favour of airstrikes. Eagle, who voted on the same side as Benn, 
said: “I think it was genuine admiration for the case that had been made by 
Hilary Benn, which I have to say was far better than the case the prime 
minister managed to make.”

Asked whether Corbyn would lead the party in 2020, she said Labour would “work 
with the leader we have got”.

After 100 days in the job, Corbyn is making clear that he intends to lead the 
party into the 2020 election and stressing his huge mandate with the party 
membership.

There has been speculation that the Labour leader will shake up his top team 
in January after five months of leadership. Corbyn has had differences of 
opinion with some in his shadow cabinet not just over the Syria vote but also 
policy on Trident, which is being reviewed by Maria Eagle, the shadow defence 
secretary, andKen Livingstone <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/livingstone>
, the former mayor of London.

Over the weekend, Corbyn said his critics within the party should share their 
talents and not obsess about his leadership. Asked about the possibility of a 
reshuffle in January, he said: “There will be appointments when appointments 
are made.”

But in his Huffington Post interview, he played down the prospect that the 
boundary review taking place in 2018 would be used to get rid of Labour MPs who 
do not agree with the leadership. He said he was not making any proposals for 
reselection of MPs but it would be up to party members if they wanted to do 
that.

Asked what would happen if members wanted to change the reselection rules, to 
use the boundary review to open up the whole process for every MP, he said: 
“It’s not up to me, it’s up to the party to decide … I am not a dictator”.

Saying he would like MPs to engage more with party members and constituents, 
Corbyn added: “I think we should all be accountable to our parties but I also 
think that accountability should be a process of engagement: that MPs do engage 
with their constituency parties, do engage with their constituents, and MPs do 
change their minds on things because of local opinion. That’s not wrong.

“There’s nothing bad about that and many MPs clearly changed their mind on the 
Syria vote between what I was picking up when the proposal first came and what 
happened five days later.”

Len McCluskey, the general secretary of the Unite union, which is Labour’s 
biggest financial backer, said on Sunday that some in the parliamentary party 
needed to change their attitude, and criticised the small number who have been 
“enormously disrespectful” towards their leader. He said that at the same time 
Corbyn was “learning to be a leader” and everyone was on a learning curve about 
the changes in the party.

