
Here’s one poll you might not have glimpsed amid last week’s Trump ’n’ Tusk 
melee. Consultancy ComRes asked 498 EU insiders – MEPs, staffers, lobbyists – 
what newspapers, broadcasters and online media they relied on. Their answers 
cut both ways, of course. Anyone who wants to rage against a Brussels bubble of 
incomprehension is welcome to their chance.

But just turn the figures around and point them at Britain. Who do the 498 
find influential? Politico, the newly expanded US political website, and the 
BBC virtually tie at 52% and 51% respectively. TheFT and the Economist are 39% 
and 30% powers. TheNew York Times and Wall Street Journal score 17% and 14%. 
But where, pray, is the thunderous might of the British press? TheGuardian, at 
5%, is just on the list. But theSun, Times, Express, Telegraph, Mail, the 
bugles of proud, defiant Britain? They don’t begin to make the cut.

Nor do the issues that dominate those bugles’ thinking. Of the 498, 76% reckon 
the refugee problem Europe’s biggest issue, while 51% cite Isis/Daesh. Slow 
European growth (44%) and climate change (27%) are vexing, too. But Britain and 
that blinking referendum? Only 12% put it on their list. That may look like a 
mistake come June: but opinion polls aren’t there to signal mistakes, merely to 
give snapshots of attitudes. You can look through both ends of a telescope.

So on – that Tusk letter’s morning after 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/01/no-10-reject-criticism-david-cameron-eu-negotiations-joke>
 – to“The great delusion” in the Mail and more ritual pun-ishment from the Bun 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/feb/03/most-of-the-national-press-lashes-david-camerons-eu-settlement>
: “Who do EU think you are kidding Mr Cameron?” Plus more of the same from all 
the usual suspects. But a quick flick through Europe’s front pages and websites 
tells a quite different story.El Pais is more worried about finding a Spanish 
government, naturally enough.FAZ in Germany has 5,000 missing refugee children 
top of its shop.Le Monde rates Leicester City – “l’une des plus grosses 
surprises de l’histoire moderne du football anglais”ahead of Brexit home games.

Where, you wonder, does this British obsession with exit come from? From the 
Greater Empire of theSun, perhaps. Only last week Mr Murdoch was tweeting his 
orders. <https://twitter.com/rupertmurdoch/status/694116089635147777> “UK-EU 
negotiations meaningless without complete control of borders. Must be able to 
choose immigrants.” Richard Desmond’sExpress allegiances have always been 
Ukipian.

But consider the Mail, booming away about “tawdry charades”, “damning 
indictments” and Eurosceptic ministers “either bullied or bribed into silence… 
It would be a crime against democracy if open debate on this historic vote were 
sacrificed to the ambition and vanity of careerist politicians.”

Which, being interpreted, means start swinging, Theresa, Boris and Gove. Do 
what theMail tells you. “Is there anyone in this pusillanimous cabinet with the 
guts to speak his mind and put principles and country before personal 
ambition?” Cue Richard Littlejohn, Max Hastings and the full repertory company. 
Cue a Day Two torrent of frustration covering all of page one and much of page 
14.“Who will speak for England?” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/04/who-will-speak-for-england-asks-the-daily-mail-and-twitter-answers>

It is, though, a little difficult to see where all this particular avalanche 
of invective comes from. Vere Harmsworth, the proprietor who, with David 
English as editor, built the modernDaily Mail, was pretty clear where he stood: 
“I left Thatcher’s Britain for Mitterrand’s France because it is in Europe that 
our future lies.” His son, the current Lord Rothermere, retained dad’s Parisian 
non-dom status (until the chancellor grew proactive).

English made it quite clear – to me – that his mind wasn’t remotely closed on 
EU membership. What drives Paul Dacre’s vehement scepticism, then ? “‘The 
politics of my newspapers … are what my editors believe the politics of their 
readers to be,” Harmsworth once told John Major. But is this now merely a 
rationalisation for endless assaults from Kensington High Street (whose 
denizens, as we discovered yet again the other day, don’t know the difference 
between the EU and the European Council even now)?

Who are these ruthlessly “gagged” voices within the cabinet? Northern Ireland 
secretary Theresa Villiers, perhaps, who “has a manner as cold as Sherpa 
Tenzing’s nose and a voice frosted by boredom. Listen to this one for a few 
minutes and you’ll be gnawing at your knuckles in despair,” according to – yes! 
– theDaily Mail.

Chris Grayling? The “gormless” leader of the house, “who stands at the 
despatch box like some tranquillised ungulate, his jaw slowly rotating as he 
produces a plop-plop-plop of prosaic sludge”. TheMail again.

Or Iain Duncan Smith: “Probably the feeblest Tory leader in living memory… 
when Mr Duncan Smith had the opportunity to distinguish himself in the months 
before the Iraq war, he proved himself more credulously pro-Bush even than Mr 
Blair, and at one stage seemed to suggest that Saddam Hussein’s fictitious 
weapons of mass destruction might be targeted at London” – according to theMail.

Perhaps they’ll have to settle for Liam Fox, who isn’t in anyone’s cabinet 
because “he failed to observe the distinction between his public and his 
private life. He also followed a style of conduct that made him look odd, and 
brought criticism and ridicule on his office. In the end he had defective 
judgment, and paid for it with his job.” Simon Heffer, in theMail.

Such a parade of failures and flops might, in a bracing Mail world, prompt any 
editor to hasten to the other side of the argument. So might the history of his 
paper. So, in part, might the anxieties of faithful readers: say the 100,000 or 
more waiting in Spain to see where Brexit (and no referendum vote) leaves their 
healthcare and pension rights. But this, it seems, is a battle without nuance, 
second thoughts or memory of judgments past. Mr Murdoch, a naturalised 
American, is allowed to sit in New York and endorse Ben Carson, Donald Trump or 
Marco Rubio at the drop of a tweet. He can change his mind in an instant if he 
wishes. But supposed principle ties the mightyMail, winner of so many 
campaigns, to the mast – and a future led by politicians theMail now openly 
excoriates.

Dacre has been an outstanding editor in the eyes of many among his readers and 
peers. He picks his middle-weight battles brilliantly, and often wins them. (As 
some grotesquely overpaid public service bosses may lament this weekend.) His 
Mail has an authentic voice that politicians fear. But there’s sometimes a thin 
blue line of bathos in the sand near his desk.

Who will speak for England? (“And, of course, by ‘England’… we mean the whole 
of the United Kingdom.”) Here’s the “supposedly neutral” BBC getting it in the 
neck again. Here’s the Conservative party, throwing off “all pretence of 
impartiality, proselytising for the EU in defiance of most of its rank and 
file”. Why, even Boris is no hero now, but a timorous blond beastie “never 
known for his courage” and playing “flirtatious footsie” in pursuit of “a plum 
job”. Leadership? There’s only “charismatic tub-thumper” Nigel Farage and “the 
magnificent Lord Lawson” left.

Is that the Lawson who walked out on Margaret Thatcher in 1989 because she 
didn’t like him shadowing the deutschmark? “Goodbye and good riddance,” said the
Sun. “His policies were bankrupt,” cried the Mail. But magnificence is a 
movable feast at theMail high table. No wonder those EU insiders, wondering 
what the hell to read, seem to reach for theNew York Times as their paper of 
first resort while England, this sceptic isle full of blessed plots, redefines 
“impartiality”.
