
• To relieve the potential monotony of a monoculture in a garden devoted to 
bamboo, other plants have been introduced to provide contrast, including reeds, 
irises and other marginals.

• Pleioblastus viridistriatus is a compact green and cream plant that will 
grow to only a few feet tall but spreads rapidly by runners, swamping 
neighbouring plants, so give it plenty of space.

• Evergreen phormiums are a good companion to bamboo, needing equally minimal 
maintenance.

• Bamboo will not grow in water, but newly planted specimens will need plenty 
of it for the first two years until they become established.

• Clump-forming phyllostachys, with its yellow, black or green culms, is the 
most popular type of bamboo in the UK. It is easily recognisable by the pairs 
of side shoots arising from the canes

The recent fashion for bamboo in the UK has resulted in many gardens becoming 
swamped by the stuff. The bamboo experts at La Bambouseraie de Prafrance near 
Anduze in Provence advocate a thick plastic rhizome barrier about a foot tall 
and sunk almost totally into the ground to stop the plant's underground stems 
spreading where they are not wanted. But a visit to this garden may reacquaint 
you with the charms of the bamboo family.

After entering via a broad avenue of 50m tall California redwoods, visitors 
encounter a giant forest of the bamboo Phyllostachys viridis. This makes 
something of a Tolkienesque cathedral, with cavernous spaces set between the 
walls of stout, green culms, which can reach 18m tall, although the tallest 
bamboos in the garden are an even loftier 23m. Pathways lead out into the light 
to an enormous Japanese garden with water winding through it in the shape of a 
slumbering dragon.

Bamboos are thirsty plants: not surprising when some species can grow up to a 
metre in one day. La Bambouseraie is sited in a sheltered alluvial basin with 
its own microclimate, but a 5km-long network of irrigation channels brings in 
water from a nearby river. It seems to work: there are only about 12 staff 
working in the 34-hectare garden (bambouseraie.fr <http://www.bambouseraie.fr>).
