
Q: I've just bought two Celia Birtwell dresses online from Topshop. I didn't 
realise when I bought them that they were both backless designs. I can't go out 
without a bra, and although I've found halterneck bras, the dresses are so low 
cut I don't think they'll work. Can you suggest alternative underwear for me? 
Cheril

A: Why not try the Nuage multiposition strap by Lejaby (£6, www.figleaves.com 
<http://www.figleaves.com>)? This attaches to any ordinary bra at the back and 
pulls the strap down, hopefully below the dress neckline. If you have 
pretty-coloured, narrow-strapped bras, make a feature of the visible strap - or 
this option is a great excuse to invest in some Agent Provocateur. If your bras 
provide support and comfort and thus sport straps more than 2in wide, invest in 
a simple cotton vest or camisole. Pick a colour that will suit your dress - one 
that picks up on a print detail or matches the background colour. For evening, 
try a silk slip with lace detail.

Q I loved the 'sock look' at the Miu Miu and Prada shows. I've never been a 
big fan of tights (I prefer stockings or hold-ups), and socks look like a good 
alternative. But how can I avoid looking like an overgrown schoolgirl? Agnes

A: You will only look like a rebellious St Trinian's girl if you expose too 
much skin. Keep it chic by mimicking the Prada style and wear a skirt that 
falls to just above the knee. A half-inch gap of flesh is quite enough, and for 
over-the-knee socks the same applies: try them with a jumper dress and boots. 
The oatmeal socks at Miu Miu blend in on pale English-rose skin. If that is 
your skin tone, pick a stronger colour or get out the fake-tan bottle. Finally, 
you need good legs to carry off this look. Ask for friends' advice and 
experiment at low-key gatherings before launching your new look at a big event, 
as it is a difficult one for grown-ups to adjust to. Then, to build up your 
sock wardrobe, go towww.tabio.com <http://www.tabio.com> or check out Kurt 
Geiger's new line of socks that are a fraction of the designer versions, 
starting at £25.


· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
