
Recently I visited my 90-something mother (with dementia) and stepfather (with 
aggressive prostate cancer) for 24 hours – and stayed three weeks.

For several years my stepfather had been my mother’s carer, which just about 
worked while he was not too ill. But when his illness led him into the shadows, 
the services intervened. His GP found them both so hungry that she hurriedly 
cooked them a meal, then referred my stepfather to an NHS continuing care team 
and my mother to a social worker. The social worker’s referral of my mother to 
a reablement team in the morning resulted in a visit that same evening. So I 
had good reason to be grateful to these responsive, efficient professionals 
whose assessments produced such quick action.

Related: Carers don't know what help they're entitled to. Here's how to change 
that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/jun/08/carers-know-help-entitled-change>

So why did I stay? Well, illness trajectories aren’t smooth. I found my 
stepfather even more ill than I’d expected and the GP pondering a referral to a 
local hospice-at-home care team who stay up with the dying person all night. My 
stepfather wanted to die at home, and the GP didn’t expect him to live more 
than a few days.

So I said I’d stay until he died, and thought that with the help of the two 
teams of care workers we’d be OK. In addition, there’d be the hospice-at-home 
team who would stay when they could. The following are my random reflections as 
the hours lengthened into weeks.

Day one

Two teams of care workers, one NHS-funded, one social services. OK, messy, but 
it works. That’s all that matters. And, my God, they are kind people. Kindness 
matters most of all.

Day three

My mother is gradually getting more and more anxious. How much do we really 
know about dementia? I’ve told her my stepfather is dying. At some level she 
knows and is grieving, though she can’t remember his name, or where they live. 
Most of the time she can’t remember he’s lying in bed in a room down the 
corridor and she saw him five minutes ago. Her constant plea: don’t leave me, 
please sit with me, when will I next see you? (as I go to the kitchen to make a 
cup of tea).

Day seven

I can’t leave her any more. Today a neighbour found her in the street. She 
managed to open the front door. Must get a new lock fitted so this doesn’t 
happen again.

Day 10

The day from hell. Morning fine: care workers visited, changed stepfather, all 
OK. Then about two o’clock heard my stepfather’s plangent “help, help, help, 
help me”. Heard this before and can assess its urgency. This time seems pretty 
urgent. My mother hobbles out of their bedroom saying he wants a newspaper. 
(Why? To assess the latest pro-Brexit arguments?) Looking into their bedroom I 
see why: the poor man’s torn off his pad after an explosive bowel movement.

He, the duvet and sheet, the floor his side of the bed, the pillows, the head 
board, his hands, the top of his head, are covered with shit. He wants the 
newspaper to try to clean himself up. I think: I cannot deal with this.

I stop my mother going back into the bedroom. I tell my stepfather I’ll ring 
his care team to make an emergency visit. I tell him he’s warm (true) and safe 
(true?) and it won’t be long until they arrive. They don’t arrive for three 
hours. Three hours of “help me, help me” punctuated by sleep.

My mother’s care worker turns up. I show her the situation. She immediately 
puts on gloves and apron and gets to work; my stepfather is not her client, 
note. She says she’s a care worker and it’s her job. Then my stepfather’s team 
of two arrives and between the three of them they clean him, wash him, clean 
what can be cleaned, dispose of what can’t. I am in awe of these people.

Day 11

Today two district nurses visit to dress my stepfather’s wounds from a fall. I 
tell them about the shit situation. Could they refer him to a continence 
specialist? I really need advice about how to stop this happening again. They 
say they will. I hear nothing.


Day 15

Another district nurse visits. I again ask for advice about continence wear 
and, again, for referral to a continence team. I show her what I’ve bought from 
Tesco, on the advice of my stepfather’s care team. Maybe I’m wrong but I think 
I catch faint puzzlement in her eyes. She’s here to clean wounds, isn’t she, 
not worry about shit?

Day 20

The last time I see a district nurse – the fourth – I think I’ve hit the 
jackpot. She understands the continence management problem immediately, says 
she’ll order special NHS pads, get them delivered and tells me I can ring the 
council’s clinical waste disposal department (I’ve been putting the continence 
pads, pants and mats into the bin; lucky bin men). I thank her and ask her if 
she’d ring my mobile when she’s ordered the pads. I’m leaving the next day. She 
says she will. She doesn’t.

Related: What is it like to be an unpaid carer? Your stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/jun/13/what-is-it-like-to-be-an-unpaid-carer-your-stories>

I left the next day because I’d arranged for a 24-hour live-in care worker 
plus relief workers to stay with my mother and step-father. Now I’m nearly 200 
miles away I can think a bit more calmly about the past few weeks. About the 
extraordinary human qualities of the care teams: no doubt low paid, definitely 
low status, from the EU, from outside the EU, from Britain. I can’t help 
thinking that anyone who wants to make it more difficult for extraordinary 
people like these to live and work in Britain is crazy.

I think about what the most important qualities in carers are, (under which 
term I include nurses and doctors). They obviously need specialist knowledge 
and skills but, crucially, the ability to look outside their professional 
frames. It isn’t the job of district nurses to worry about shit, is it? Well, 
no more than it’s the job of GPs to cook for their patients.

This new series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
