
I got knocked off my bike this morning. It wasn't as dramatic as that, 
actually. My bike was knackered and I ended up off it, but it all happened so 
slowly (literally slowly; this isn't post-traumatic stress talking) that it was 
more like a slide. I desperately want to tell you exactly who was where in the 
road, and why, ergo, it was not my fault, but probably dead north on my entire 
moral compass is that you're not allowed to describe traffic conflict, of any 
sort, ever, unless you end up dead.

Anyway, this fella gets out of the car and goes, "The first thing to check is, 
are you all right?" So cheers, pal, first you crunch my front wheel, and now 
you take the righteous wind out of my sails. I had a stupid front pannier as 
well (I'd tell you more, but number two on my Ethics Top Five is: do not 
discuss bike accessories unless they are magic) so I broke my laptop. As soon 
as he'd checked my well-being, he immediately launched into that insurance 
company protocol, where you go, "I don't think I was in the wrong." In the cool 
of the night, I can look at this kindly and say I think people hate not being 
able to say sorry after an accident. I think even if they truthfully don't 
think it's their fault, they want to say sorry, and when they think it might be 
their fault, they want to say sorry so much that they have to keep telling you 
it wasn't their fault just to occupy their tongues.

At the time, though, I was just in a fury, and of course the first thing that 
came into my head was, "How can you possibly have missed me? I am ginormous. I 
am the size of a car, I look like a car made of flesh. Never mind 'Did I 
indicate?', how could you miss a spectacle like that?" But I rejected this just 
in time, because it would have just been an elaborate way of saying, "I'm 
pregnant, and you should look where you're going more around the pregnant," to 
which I think a reasonable response would be, "Or, love, you could try going on 
a bus."

Here's the thing. If you're going to expect special care, and people not to 
smoke around you (which I don't, by the way - though apparently nobody smokes 
any more), and people to give up seats, blah, it's your side of the contract to 
at least pretend to be looking after yourself.

Pretend too hard, however, and you will become unbearable, to other people and 
to yourself. This cannot be good for the foetus. My friend got into a 
cross-sectional study when she was pregnant about the effect of maternal stress 
on the developing embryo.

Obviously, whatever the results are, there won't be much she can do about them 
vis-a-vis her little one, who has now been born, and has to deal with her 
stress levels in the regular way. But she's found out some interesting things 
just anecdotally, from the researcher, such as babies are soothed just by the 
act of changing their nappy, even if you put them back into the dirty one. I 
think it's because it's a relatively simple process that we've all seen a lot 
on telly, so it's the only four minutes of the day when, to the baby, there 
appears to be a person in charge who knows what they're doing. Never minding 
that for a second, there hasn't been enough research, in my view, on the effect 
on a foetus of maternal whingeing and moaning, over the course of the 
gestation. I would have been brilliant for that cohort, but it's too late now.

I'm trying desperately to complicate things, but I think in fact it's one of 
those incredibly simple equations, such as "too ill to go to school, too ill to 
go to a party". You should stop cycling when you are large enough that you 
basically think the other road users should be treating you like a shy horse. 
Though I still mustered the energy to have this argument with C, when I got 
home: he said, "I don't think you should be cycling any more." "But it wasn't 
my fault." "I'm sure it wasn't, but your cognitive abilities in the third 
semester ..." "TRIMESTER" (untroubled, as if I hadn't spoken) "... just deneg 
... dene ..." "DEGENERATE" "... so much ..." "Two cans of Heineken! If I can't 
cycle when I'm pregnant, you can't do anything after two cans of Heineken." "I 
don't want to do anything."

Gah, why am I arguing? I don't want to cycle. I'm only six months pregnant and 
I don't even want to go anywhere.
