
Hereford Road Restaurant, Notting Hill

As you would expect from a graduate of Fergus Henderson's St John 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/fergus-henderson>, chef-owner Tom 
Pemberton specialises in common-sense cooking. His kitchen works diligently to 
extract maximum flavour from often neglected ingredients (skirt steak, mutton, 
mackerel etc) and Pemberton tries to keep the prices down accordingly. At £13, 
the two-course set lunch is excellent value, but with this feature's 
self-imposed £10-a-head price limit in mind, the express lunch (£9.50 for a 
daily changing no-choice main course, a glass of wine and coffee) is an 
absolute steal.

A sample plate of lentils and roasted quail was great. Cooked-down with 
rosemary, garlic, onion and spinach, the lentils were fragrant, alive with 
flavour and rendered to a fraction-past-al-dente perfection. The quail, whilst 
not the tastiest game bird ever, was supremely juicy, the skin well seasoned 
and crisp. Washed down with a glass of light, nicely tannic Portuguese table 
wine, it was a thoroughly enjoyable 45-minute break. Service is spot on and the 
restaurant itself is a light, coolly modern space. Foodies will appreciate the 
two-person booths opposite the open kitchen where you can earwig on the chefs 
as they work their way through the service. It was unspectacular stuff. This is 
a venue where, you sense, Ramsay-style meltdowns would be anathema. But, 
nonetheless, it was interesting listening in on the comments and instructions.
• Express lunch £9.50. 3 Hereford Road, Westbourne Grove, W2 (+44 (0) 20-7727 
1144,herefordroad.org <http://www.herefordroad.org/>)

Orange Pekoe, Barnes
 Orange Pekoe 
Barnes feels less like London than Henley-on-Thames or some similarly sedate 
corner of Oxfordshire. Orange Pekoe, a speciality tea room and cafe in the 
modern style – all jazzy, expensive wallpapers and tastefully deployed vintage 
chintz – exudes that gentle atmosphere. Its calm cheerfulness is particularly 
welcome over breakfast. The morning menu stretches from freshly baked pastries 
to Scottish smoked salmon and cream cheese on toasted muffins, and includes the 
Pekoe Florentine (£6), where the expected hollandaise is replaced (presumably 
with calorie-counting yummy mummies in mind) with fresh spinach and a dressing 
of olive oil. The irony tang of the spinach and the grassy, pungent oil work 
surprisingly well.

Elsewhere, the daytime menu runs the tarts-salads-sandwiches gamut, with 
everything from breads to pies made from scratch on site. The takeaway 
sandwiches (£3.90) looked good, and the baking is top notch. A piece of 
fudge-like chocolate brownie was full of dark berry fruit flavours. 
Incidentally, Orange Pekoe might specialise in fine teas (60 loose leaf or 
flower teas, £3.60 a pot) but it isn't pretentious. For those who require 
something dark and strong to kick start their day they also serve a robust, 
subtly earthy breakfast blend in a proper big mug.
• Breakfast £1.30-£8, sandwiches/meals, £4.50-£8.50. 3 White Hart Lane, SW13 
(+44 (0) 20-8876 6070,orangepekoeteas.com <http://orangepekoeteas.com/>)

Santa Maria Pizzeria, Ealing
 Santa Maria 
Naturally, this Neapolitan-owned pizzeria has a wood-fired pizza oven. That's 
unremarkable these days. Few restaurateurs, however, would go to the trouble of 
bringing over a fourth-generation Italian specialist to build said oven, using 
handmade bricks prepared from specific sands and clays from around Vesuvius and 
the Amalfi coast. Such is the determination at Santa Maria to produce 
superlative pizza. And Ealing clearly appreciates that effort. On a Thursday 
evening, this small, neat, off-grey space – dominated by a striking image of 
Santa Maria di Merino, a maroon patchwork on a huge plywood board – was hot and 
busy with people picking up takeaways and squeezing in at the tables.

Like the sandwich, pizza is at its best when it is kept to a few superb 
ingredients, and Santa Maria'sbufalina exemplifies this. The base is foldable, 
paper thin in the middle, expertly charred and ringed with a springy edge. 
Essentially, it's a shallow pool of vibrant, seasoned tomato pulp and 
exquisite, melting buffalo milk mozzarella. At times, it is like eating a pizza 
topped with double cream. Superb.
• Pizza £4.50-£8.95. 15 St.Mary's Road, W5 (+44 (0) 20-8579 1462, 
santamariapizzeria.com <http://www.santamariapizzeria.com/>)

Clarke's Shop, Kensington
 Clarkes 
All diplomatic number plates, small dogs in rain coats and ludicrously 
expensive designer sunglasses, Kensington is an unlikely place to stop off in 
search of good, affordable food. But this deli-cafe next door toSally Clarke 
<http://www.sallyclarke.com/about.php>'s flagship restaurant is a useful 
address to note. Something of a pioneer in her day, Clarke has been promoting 
the virtues of simple, sensible, seasonal cooking at these premises for more 
than 25 years. The shop's tiny, 10-seater cafe section, however, could do with 
freshening up. The service lacked the kind of warmth and dynamism you might 
expect and the tables weren't being cleared promptly between guests. A sample 
breakfast croissant – a delicate pillowy mound – was fine but not quite the 
zinger expected. It all felt a little glum.

Which was in stark contrast to the takeaway samples from the deli counter. A 
slice of celeriac and parmesan tart (£3.10) and a Gloucester Old Spot sausage 
roll (£3.25), were both very, very good. Still warm from the restaurant 
kitchens, they were clearly baked by somebody of considerable skill who loves 
what they do. Go, buy, eat on the run, and Clarke's will brighten your day.
• Eat in: breakfast £1.90-£6, lunch £2.90-£7.80. Takeaway snacks and 
sandwiches: £1.50-£4. 122 Kensington Church Street, W8 (+44 (0) 20-7229 2190,
sallyclarke.com/shop.php <http://www.sallyclarke.com/shop.php>)

Mr Falafel, Shepherd's Bush
 Mr Falafel 
Whatever it is that brings you to Shepherd's Bush, be it BBC Television 
Centre, Queen's Park Rangers Football Club or Westfield shopping centre, do not 
missMr Falafel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2007/apr/07/features.weekend8> or Abu 
Zaad (below). The former is found at the entrance to Shepherd's Bush market, 
where, from a simple cafe unit, Ahmad Yassine dispenses nutty, herby 
crisp-fried falafel of a remarkable fluffy lightness in various wraps.

Accompaniments such as hummus, tahini sauce, pickled turnips and cucumbers add 
layers of spiky flavour. In the deluxe version the fried cauliflower florets 
are sensational and the "fried potato" pieces (actually, cold chips) work 
better than you might think. It's a dynamic dose of carbs. There is mint or 
orange blossom tea, alongside the usual soft drinks. Wholly vegetarian, the Mr 
Falafel menu is largely vegan-friendly, too.
• Falafel wraps from £3. Open 11am-6pm, closed Sunday. Units T4-T5, New 
Shepherd's Bush Market, Uxbridge Road, W12 (+44 (0) 7798 906668,mrfalafel.co.uk 
<http://www.mrfalafel.co.uk>)

Abu Zaad, Shepherd's Bush
 Abu Zaad 
A little bit of downtown Damascus on the Uxbridge Road, this buzzy Syrian 
restaurant – all carved wood and ornate Arabic brasswork, satellite TV and 
genial bustle – offers eye-opening food at remarkably low prices. Syria shares 
many dishes with its Middle Eastern and eastern Mediterranean neighbours 
(hummus, tabbouleh, Lebanese fattoush salad, moussaka, Moroccan tagines and 
myriad grilled kebabs) and, naturally, the aubergine plays a significant role 
in the Abu Zaad kitchen.

Moutabal – one of the many starters which can also be eaten as a meze-style 
selection – is grilled aubergine blended with lemon juice and sesame oil to 
produce an intensely smoky, yet unusually sour thick wet paste. It certainly 
gets the saliva glands going. Makloba, meanwhile, is a dish of rice, aubergine, 
lamb and pine nuts cooked together in a special sauce, which has none of the 
heat you might expect. Instead, the dish is full of warm, savoury woodland 
flavours, like a wild mushroom risotto. There is no alcohol at Abu Zaad, but 
its exotic fresh juices (£1.75) are brilliant. A blitzed lemon and mint juice 
was the colour of the Incredible Hulk, perfectly balanced, and one of the most 
refreshing things I have ever tasted.
• Takeaway/eat-in prices: wraps from £2.25, starters from £2.50/£3, mains from 
£4.50/£5.50. 29 Uxbridge Road, W12 (+44 (0) 20-8749 5107,abuzaad.co.uk 
<http://www.abuzaad.co.uk/>)

Mr Christian's, Notting Hill
 Mr Christian 
Originally opened by chef Glynn Christian – famous in the 1980s as the 
resident cook on BBC's Pebble Mill at One and Breakfast Time programmes – this 
delicatessen has been driving up food standards in Notting Hill for some 37 
years. Now owned by wine merchants Jeroboams, it may not have the sleek 
designer looks or the eat-in cafe of its newer rival, the Grocer on Elgin, just 
across the road, but it's a little bit cheaper, and, from what I sampled, just 
as tasty. The daily takeaway menu includes the shop's own hot pasta bakes, 
soup, samosas, salads, various pies, sausage rolls (£1.10, and a little too 
heavily seasoned with sage and pepper, in my opinion) and seriously good cakes.

Mr Christian's sandwiches (pre-prepared, but that morning) are as fresh as the 
proverbial daisy and generously loaded with good things. Everything about a 
sample salmon and cream cheese bagel (the dense, chewy, almost sweetish bagel; 
the rich, thick, sharp cream cheese; the bright, lightly cured salmon; the 
fastidious scattering of fresh chives and ground pepper) was testament to Mr 
Christian's enduring quality. The staff are engagingly friendly, too.
• Snacks from £1, sandwiches/ meals £3.20-£6. 11 Elgin Crescent, W11 (+44 (0) 
20-7229 0501,mrchristians.co.uk <http://www.mrchristians.co.uk/>)

White Horse, Parson's Green, Fulham
 Photograph: John Downing/Getty Images 
The White Horse is famous for two things: beer and its popularity with braying 
hoorays. Thankfully, on this visit, the former (eight well kept real ales from 
£2.80 a pint) were far more in evidence than the latter. On a sunny Thursday 
evening, this handsomely polished Victorian boozer seemed to have attracted a 
reasonably diverse cross section of west London life, and the room was suffused 
in that easy-going good cheer that is generated by that great leveller: good 
beer. Harveys Sussex Bitter, Adnams Broadside and Fuller's Chiswick are the 
pub's regular real ales and a sample pint from the guests – Brewster's zesty 
Hophead – was in excellent condition. The White Horse also carries a very 
impressive selection of draught and bottled lagers, US and continental beers.

Foodwise, there are various good quality sandwiches (eg. home-cured honey 
roast ham; deep-fried cod cheek with lettuce and salad cream) available until 
6pm, and, outside of that, bar snacks of the ploughman's (£7.50), potted crab, 
pork pie and homemade piccalilli variety. A sample rare roast beef sandwich 
(£5.60) was a good size, all the components were fresh and the horseradish had 
a decent kick to it. The beef was a touch fridge cold at first, but it had good 
flavour when it warmed up a little. On the bank holiday weekend of 29 April-2 
May, the White Horse hosts the Hop-Forward Beer Festival, with a barbecue and 
hog roast.
• Sandwiches and bar snacks £4.50-£8.25. 1-3 Parson's Green, SW6 (+44 
(0)20-7736 2115,whitehorsesw6.com <http://www.whitehorsesw6.com/>)

Books for Cooks, Notting Hill
 Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
The self-explanatory Books for Cooks is also home to the Test Kitchen – a 
bright little cafe space, the walls painted colourfully with pictures of De 
Cecco pasta packets, artichokes and aubergines – which every lunchtime puts 
some of those recipes from the shelves through their paces. Quality is high, 
prices remarkably low (three courses, £7) and you have to get here early 
(around 11.45am), to secure one of the 20 or so seats. Otherwise, you might 
squeeze in just after 1pm, as people begin to drift away, but the kitchen stops 
serving at 1.30-2pm latest.

The daily menu typically consists of a starter, a main and several cakes, with 
customers free to eat as much or as little as they wish. A sample plate of 
Turkish-style chicken with black-eyed beans was boldly flavoured peasant food 
at its best. A moist leg and nicely crisped thigh arrived atop a tomato and 
bean stew which had a good long flavour and a surprising paprika heat. It 
wasn't a huge portion, but it was a filling lunch and, at £4, incredibly good 
value. It is ironic, of course, that wealthy Notting Hill has such an 
affordable resource on its doorstep (the middle-class chatter here is of media 
careers; you may recognise some of your fellow diners from Newsnight Review), 
but it would be churlish to resent that.

Instead, get down here. Treat yourself to lunch. It will be £7 plus your tube 
fare well spent. The staff, incidentally, are happy to chew over the details of 
the dishes with interested foodies, after which you can get back to browsing 
the shelves for that must-have study of Tudor cake decoration.
• One course £4, two for £5, three for £7. 4 Blenheim Crescent, W11, (+44 (0) 
20-7221 1992,booksforcooks.com <http://www.booksforcooks.com/>)

Tosa, Hammersmith
 Tosa 
By the door sits a 15kg box labelled "premium grade restaurant charcoal". An 
indication that Tosa is not your typical Japanese restaurant. Yes, it serves 
sushi, sashimi and familiarudon noodle and tempura mains, but the real draw 
here is that robata charcoal grill at the front of the restaurant, where the 
chef prepares his grilledkushiyaki skewers (from under £2). If you are one of 
those people who likes the raw visceral simplicity of smoky, caramelised, 
lightly charred meats, then Tosa will transport you to hog heaven. Literally in 
the case of thebutabara, a grilled skewer of pork belly upon which the 
rectangular pieces of fat crisp up into a kind of supra-bacon. The chicken 
livers (rich, velvety, carrying a little tang from their marinade) and the ox 
tongue are not to be missed. The texture of the latter may be more squid than 
steak, but ox tongue, here seasoned with salt and lemon, delivers a 
sensationally beefy flavour – better, in fact, than most modern beef.

The only potential problem at Tosa is that, at £10-a-head, the four or five 
skewers you can squeeze in for that money may not quite fill you up, if it's 
your main meal of the day. In that case, if there are two of you, pool your 
cash, share a main noodle dish, drink tap water, and then spend the rest on 
skewers. You won't regret it. Alternatively, Tosa does takeaway, so if you're 
passing at lunch, drop in and pick-up some grilleduzura (quail's eggs) or 
torikawa (chicken skin). Tosa also does a full-meal lunch deal including a main 
dish, rice, miso, salad etc for £11.
• Skewers from £1.70, mains £6.60-£10. 332 King Street, W6 (+44 (0) 20-8748 
0002,tosauk.com <http://www.tosauk.com/>). Second branch at 152 High Road, East 
Finchley, N2 (+44 (0) 20-8883 8850)

Tony travelled from Manchester to London with Virgin Trains (virgintrains.co.uk
 <http://www.virgintrains.co.uk/>)
