
You want to try to save money when eating out? Oh my giddy goatburger. 
Readers, it is once more to the dining breach. Let us be frank with each other. 
For this is no time to mince words. This is the time to mince cheap beef and 
serve it as a family supper for 50p a head, potatoes and seasonings extra. You 
say you want advice on how to budget in restaurants during the economic 
downturn? Let me be the first to tell you that the most effective way to budget 
in a restaurant during an economic downturn is to cancel your stupid 
reservation.

What are you thinking about? You could knit clogs for the kids for the next 
decade with what dinner for four at Le Tout Snoot will cost you. If money is 
too tight to mention, stay at home instead. Crack open a tin of chickpeas (save 
that juice for a nourishing soup). Barbecue the dog on a bonfire made of your 
own furniture. Drink tap. Don't mind the hunger gap. Sell the kids. Just say no.

For you don't need me to tell you that times are tough out there. Money is not 
rough puff or flaky. It is short. Things are so desperate that I even find 
myself making lame jokes about pastry. The shame of it. We are armpit deep in a 
recession and in a recession, the first things to go from the household budget 
of even the most dedicated diner are taxis and restaurants. Wave bye-bye to the 
starched napkin and the service charge for the time being. Say hello to the bus 
stop and the stockpot. Ask yourself how you ever managed to afford roast 
chicken with truffles for two at La Petite Maison and still have change out of 
a Landsbanki high interest account. For many of us, turning on the heating, not 
having the waiter bring you another slice of foie gras terrine with a glass of 
Sauternes, is what constitutes a luxury now.

So habits change. They have to. Since early September, the restaurant trade in 
the UK has been hurting bad. In France, it has been even worse. Brasseries and 
bistros have been closing like a narcolept's eyelids. People are eating out 
less, for obvious reasons, but they still want to enjoy themselves. Many are 
trying to recreate the restaurant experience at home. If the food costs are 
four times less - which is the average restaurant mark up - then why not? 
Earlier this month, Tesco reported that sales of its own label duck breasts 
were up nine per cent, with racks of lamb up over 300 per cent. That's a lot of 
fancy cooking going on out there.

Meanwhile, UK national sales of chocolate and subscriptions to online dating 
are rocketing. Interesting. As tumbleweeds roll through our favourite 
restaurants, we're all too busy eating tubes of Rolos and snogging complete 
strangers to notice.

The one good thing about a recession is that it acts as quality control on the 
catering trade, sifting out the overpriced and over-inflated. Things will get 
better for everyone in restaurants, probably sooner rather than later. And look 
at it this way. No matter how much in love you are with Croydon Snugglebuns or 
Lovely Rita(GSOH) whom you met on debts'r'us.com, you can't stay in forever. 
You've got to go out to dinner sooner or later. So here are my credit crunch 
do's and don'ts.

Don't be that party on table eight who ask if they can split a main course 
between six and have you got any bones for their (ahem) dog while they are at 
it. Don't order one glass of house white and produce half a dozen straws for 
everyone when it appears. Don't order the cheeseburger with fries and salad, 
then ask the waiter to hold the fries, the greens, the cheese and the burger. 
If all you can afford is a soft bap, then go right ahead and ask for one. Don't 
marry one, like Katie Price did, but note that being cash poor and asset 
stripped no longer has any social stigma. We're all in the same leaky boat. 
When all else fails, remember we are proud northern Europeans. We have our 
customs and age old traditions to keep us going through these difficult times. 
I don't mean the cheese fondue at Cosy Alpine Corner or the sauerkraut 
sandwiches at Bouchon Breton. No. When all else fails, let's conform to our 
international stereotype, and spend all out money on booze instead.
