
PhD students’ relationships with their supervisors are pivotal; not only in 
terms of producing a good thesis, but ensuring academic and professional 
development. But whilePhD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> candidates’ work is 
regularly checked by supervisors, it is far less common, to have formal checks 
made on the supervisors, with students assessing their performance.

The imbalance of power in these relationships needs to be acknowledged. It’s 
not necessarily a bad thing, but only if supervisors use their position and 
privilege to empower students. When they say and do things that impede learning 
and advancement, it is an abuse of their authority.

Related: Academics Anonymous: student feedback is a waste of everyone's time 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/09/student-feedback-waste-of-time>

One of the main duties of the role, for example, is to provide feedback on a 
student’s work. In my experience, this can range from general comments to close 
editing of sentence constructions and grammar. It can take the form of 
constructive feedback for improvement, or demoralising sarcasm. I have 
experienced the full range, and it has had a direct impact on my research. The 
most negatively couched feedback not only hampered my progress, but left me 
wondering if I should be doing a PhD at all.

Another vital aspect of supervision responsibility is to be, well, 
responsible. Unanswered emails only increase the anxiety of a student waiting 
for feedback on a discussion chapter. Unannounced departures for conferences, 
holidays and research projects are frustrating, particularly when they could 
have been discussed in advance.

A friend of mine had to deal with the sudden retirement of his supervisor, 
whose replacement then left after just six months in the role - he now has one 
who is on research leave with intermittent access to the internet (or is 
perhaps just intermittent with his responses).

The tensions and discomfort are more keenly felt by students, I suspect. We 
can’t simply turn away from an errant supervisor and go to another, but we 
can’t talk freely about how we feel – this is akin to bad-mouthing your boss.

I previously had to psych myself up for supervision meetings; the barrage of 
criticism I faced often left me feeling stupid. But this kind of thinking 
trapped me into becoming even more dependent on my supervisor for words of 
affirmation that came too little and too late. I constantly questioned whether 
I was good enough. After months of anxiety and stress, and with advice from 
others who suffered at the hands of the same supervisor, I made a decision to 
end the relationship.

Related: Academics Anonymous: 'Why are you doing a PhD at your age?' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/25/academics-anonymous-mature-phd-worthless>

Luckily I now have new supervisors who behave in more professional and 
responsible ways. I don’t believe that there is a perfect supervisor, but the 
ones I have are giving me the support that I need – being responsive, 
pre-empting future tasks, and most importantly, making me, a novice researcher, 
feel that I have a valuable contribution to make.

When students have horrible experiences with their supervisors, they tend to 
share them in private conversations with friends or in social media rants 
because there is often no formal channel to address them. My university seems 
shy about putting in place performance measures of PhD supervision, but is 
proactive about undergraduate students’ evaluations of papers and lecturers. Is 
there an assumption that PhD students and supervisors are mature enough to work 
out mutually satisfactory supervision arrangements?

As it stands, students are often left to manage tense relationships, find 
informal alternatives to make up for bad or non-existent supervision. Unless 
things become so strained that it is necessary to change supervisors (as it was 
in my case), students tend to put up with bad behaviour.

Maybe it’s because they think that’s the way a PhD is, or because they can’t 
see any face-saving way to remedy the situation. But it’s also because 
supervisors don’t appear to be accountable to anyone. When I have raised this 
with the academic staff who support doctoral students, I often get an evasive 
response – “It’s a tricky situation, isn’t it?” – or just an empathetic nod of 
the head.

There’s huge pressure on universities to produce research in order to prove 
their worth. If research is so important, then what about making a little more 
effort to nurture researchers-to-be?

Related: Academics are being hoodwinked into writing books nobody can buy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/04/academics-are-being-hoodwinked-into-writing-books-nobody-can-buy>

Universities should not only implement performance evaluations of supervisors, 
but also cultivate safe spaces for doctoral students to share their issues, and 
have access to support staff who will be able to provide constructive advice 
and guide them towards workable strategies and solutions.

We need to get rid of the false notion of low-maintenance supervision 
relationships between consenting adults. These pairings are in fact high 
maintenance, and fragile. Ignoring the issues will not defuse a bomb that’s 
waiting to explode – one that could destroy promising careers.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. Email article 
pitches to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk
