
The Royal Botanic Gardens <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> at 
Kew is a mind-blowing 300 acres. This informally landscaped garden and 
arboretum is best known for its glasshouses and plant collections, but it is 
also home to an eclectic array of exhibits and facilities. These include a 
Chinese pagoda, libraries, galleries, laboratories, collections of paper and 
all things made from plants, even a Royal Palace where George III experienced 
his celebrated madness. Scientists abound, too, making Kew a phenomenal 
database of plant- related information. If illicit plants are seized by 
customs, they come here, as can the stomach contents of a corpse if a 
pathologist needs suspicious plant material identified.

Kew knows how to move with the times. World Heritage Site status is not given 
lightly, and regular ground-breaking exhibitions make it one of the UK's most 
visited gardens. Until March, it is home to 28 vast Henry Moore bronzes. A more 
permanent and cutting-edge attraction is the Sackler crossing, a bronze and 
granite bridge designed by John Pawson. For children, there's a child-size 
badger sett, a botanical play zone and, this month, a "snow dome" complete with 
its own northern lights. There are also festive rides, panto and Santa. And, if 
you have time, you may be able to squeeze in a look at some plants, too 
(020-8332 5655,kew.org <http://www.kew.org/>

In the great storm of 1987, Kew lost nearly 1,000 of its mature trees, many of 
them 200 years old and 100ft high. With hindsight, this devastation allowed the 
arboretum to be rejuvenated

Dogwoods, including the green Cornus stolonifera 'Flaviramea' and the red C. 
alba 'Sibirica', are the stalwarts of any winter garden, but need planting with 
a contrasting neighbour for best impact

It is not the most glamorous of plants, but Euonymus fortunei 'Emerald Gaiety' 
is the ideal low-maintenance shrub. Compact and evergreen, it smothers weeds, 
grows anywhere and doesn't need pruning

The palmhouse, designed by Decimus Burton, is the most iconic building at Kew 
and was built between 1844 and 1848 to house exotic palms being brought to 
Europe in the Victorian era

For best effect, low-growing heathers should be planted in large blocks and 
not in a one-of-each, pincushion arrangement. Erica carnea, which flowers in 
winter, enjoys acid soil but tolerates lime and shade
