 The larcenous nature of death, its habit of breaking in on us when we are 
least prepared and stealing the irreplaceable, has seldom been more sickeningly 
experienced than at Ninian Park in Cardiff on Tuesday night.
Those of us who crowded sweatily into the small entrance hall of the main 
stand to wait for word of Jock Stein's condition will always remember the long 
half hour in which the understandable vagueness of reports filtering from the 
dressing-room area lulled us into believing that Jock was going to make it 
through yet another crisis. The raw dread that had been spread among us by his 
collapse on the touchline at the end of the Wales-Scotland World Cup match gave 
way to the more bearable gloom of acknowledging that the career of one of the 
greatest managers football has known would have to be ended by immediate 
retirement.

Then - off in a corner of that confused room - Mike England, the manager of 
Wales and a deeply concerned first-hand witness of what had been happening to 
Stein, was heard to say that he was still 'very, very poorly'. There was no 
mistaking the true meaning of those words and suddenly the sense of relief that 
had been infiltrating our anxieties was exposed as baseless. We felt almost 
guilty about having allowed ourselves to be comforted by rumours. Then, 
abruptly, we knew for sure that the Big Man was dead and for some of us it was 
indeed as if our spirits, our very lives, had been burglarised.

Of all the reactions to Stein's death, none meant more than that of the 
thousands of Scotland's travelling supporters who learned of it haphazardly but 
with eerie swiftness as they got ready to celebrate a ragged draw against Wales 
that should guarantee their team a passage to the World Cup finals in Mexico 
next summer. They are, given half an excuse, the most raucously exuberant fans 
in the game but as midnight neared in Cardiff on Tuesday they wandered through 
the streets in subdued clusters, sustaining the unforced atmosphere of mourning 
that pervaded the hundreds who waited silently in the darkness outside Ninian 
Park after the last hope of reviving the stricken man inside had been abandoned.

There is no doubt that the Scots have a highly developed capacity for the 
elegiac mood, especially when there is a bottle about, but what was to be 
encountered in South Wales last week was no cheap example of the genre. When 
travel-soiled units of the tartan expeditionary force interrupted their morose 
drinking to propose toasts to the lost leader, anybody cynical enough to see 
such behaviour as just another maudlin ritual doesn't know much about the way 
the power of Jock Stein's nature communicated itself to millions of ordinary 
people.

His achievements in football were monumental, but they can only partially 
explain his impact upon and relevance to so many lives. Perhaps he was 
cherished simply because he was a true working class hero - and that is a 
species which is disappearing almost as fast in industrial Scotland as 
elsewhere, if only because the values that governed its creation are being 
relentlessly eroded day by day. Even the common misery of unemployment has not 
halted the fragmentation of a sense of community that once seemed 
indestructible.

In an age when, if I may quote a line from my brother William's latest novel, 
it is as if 'every man and his family were a private company', Stein was the 
unpretentious embodiment of that older, better code that was until not so long 
ago the compensatory inheritance of all who were born of the labouring poor. No 
one was ever likely to mistake him for saint, or even a repository of bland 
altruism. He could look after himself and his own in the market place or 
anywhere else, but there was never the remotest danger that he would be 
contaminated by the materialism that engulfs so many of those who find 
prosperity through sport or other forms of entertainment.

These days it is hard to avoid having the eardrums battered by some unlikely 
pillar of the New Right who - having persuaded himself that a largely 
fortuitous ability to kick a football or volley a tennis ball or belt out a pop 
song or tell a few jokes more acceptable than the next man is actually evidence 
of his own splendid mastery of his fate - insists that the dole queues would 
fade away over night if people got off their arses, got on their bikes and 
showed the enterprise that has carried him to what he imagines is glory. 
Stein's whole life was a repudiation of such garbage.

He was utterly Scottish, utterly Lanarkshire in fact, but his was the kind of 
loyalty to his roots that made his principles universal. His father was a miner 
who was a miner's son and Stein himself worked underground until turning 
belatedly to full-time professional football at the age of 27. During a long, 
incalculably rewarding friendship with him, I heard him say many memorable 
things and some of the most vivid were inevitably about the game he loved and 
the great practitioners of it, but he was most moved and most moving when he 
talked of that earlier phase of his working experience.

There was a dynamic, combative quality to most of his conversation 
(mischievous wind-up was a favourite mode and, though he did not drink alcohol, 
he occasionally dipped his barbs in curare) but when the subject was mining and 
miners, a tone of wistful reverie invaded his voice. 'I went down the pit when 
I was 16 (at first I was working with ponies - it was still that era) and when 
I left 11 years later I knew that wherever I went, whatever work I did, I'd 
never be alongside better men. They didn't just get their own work done and go 
away. They all stayed around until every man had finished what he had to do and 
everything was cleared up. Of course, in the bad or dangerous times that was 
even more true. It was a place where phoneys and cheats couldn't survive for 
long.

'Down there for eight hours you're away from God's fresh air and sunshine and 
there's nothing that can compensate for that. There's nothing as dark as the 
darkness down a pit, the blackness that closes in on you if your lamp goes out. 
You'd think you would see some kind of shapes but you can see nothing, nothing 
but the inside of your head. I think everybody should go down the pit at least 
once to learn what darkness is...'
