
Come, come, Weekender – you've done your Cotswolds chintz, your boutique 
Brighton, your elegant Edinburgh and languid Lakes. Admit it – what you want, 
in your heart of hearts, is a walk on the wild side. You want a proper day out 
in a real city with everything a metropolis can offer; but with canals and 
cranes and the kind of lost urban landscapes you can only find in 
post-industrial wastelands. What you're crying out for is an away day to 
Birmingham.

With high-speed rail connections galore, much of the country is within a 
two-hour train ride of Brum these days. Get off at New Street, plod on down the 
gently shelving Bullring past St Martin's church, and cross over Park Street 
into Birmingham's new cultural hub. Once known as Digbeth, this is Birmingham's 
emerging Eastside, a warren of backstreets and re-born factories that makes for 
one of the UK's most surprising creative quarters.

While Birmingham's civic centre may have shifted up the hill over the 
centuries, Eastside is where the city's story began. Dating back to medieval 
times, this has always been a hive of commerce and manufacture, with tanneries 
and foundries clustered around canals in the city of a thousand trades. These 
same factories and goods yards are the fulcrum of a new Birmingham; galleries, 
apothecaries, vinyl stores, vintage clothes shops, clubs, restaurants.

I visited last March for the city's new annual Flatpack Festival, an 
idiosyncratic and ultra-cool event that brings the area to life, embracing 
everything from art in pigeon lofts to devoutly independent film art, music 
events in shops and warehouses, and quirky options such as a bus tour of the 
original Odeon cinemas built in the city in the 20s and 30s.

The Eastside's pièce de résistance is the now famous Custard Factory. Loads of 
great stuff is clustered under its roof and alongside its wharves, from Tindal 
Street Press to artists' studios, but on Saturday mornings the Custard Factory (
custardfactory.co.uk <http://www.custardfactory.co.uk>) plays host to 
Eastside's meandering fleamarket. Browsing for pewter cigarette holders is 
thirsty work, and down the road sits the Old Crown, Birmingham's oldest pub. 
The OC is fittingly lopsided, said to be haunted, and serves a terrific pint.

I would start a tour of the area however at Manzil's, Eastside's finest curry 
house, then turn left into Allison Street, where you're spoiled for choice for 
breakfast. There's the Warehouse cafe for ace vegetarian scran, or the Eastside 
diner for a fine grilled breakfast that pulls in truckers and posties as well 
as architects. From here you'll head along Coventry Street, whose boozers have 
been revitalised as backpackers' hostels and internet cafes, to the Custard 
Factory.

Then traipse around the barrio's galleries; Vivid, Ikon Eastside, Grand Union, 
the Lombard method and Project Pigeon are all within Digbeth's footfall, all 
showcasing distinctive indigenous works.

There's just time for a frozen vodka in the Polish Club as you trudge back 
past iron bulwarks and bridges, desolate yet magnificent relics of Birmingham's 
industrial past. Eastside, while steeped in that clamour and grime, has dusted 
itself down and stepped back out with a raw new glamour.

• More details at weareeastside.com <http://www.weareeastside.com>. 2011's 
Flatpack Festival (flatpackfestival.org <http://www.flatpackfestival.org>) runs 
24-27 March, and will include a vintage mobile cinema and a drive-in cinema
