
The world the NHS operates in is changing rapidly. The burden of chronic 
disease – some four million people are predicted to suffer from diabetes by the 
end of the decade – combined with an ageing population are just a taste of the 
challenges ahead.

Our ageing population and the subsequent rise in the number of people living 
with dementia requires changes in how we tackle complex, multiple diseases. 
There are also the rising expectations of what the NHS can offer. Patients who 
might once have spent a week in a hospital bed are now being treated at a 
doctor’s surgery, in out-patients or in their own home or care home.

The adoption of innovative working practices and partnership working will help 
the struggling health service not just meet its financial challenges, but 
thrive and succeed. Medicines delivery has changed rapidly over the past three 
decades, and is no longer largely the remit of hospital doctors.

Initiatives that pull together the powerful coalition that is patients, 
voluntary organisations, local communities, the NHS and the pharmaceutical 
industry can help transform healthcare delivery.

Respiratory innovation – promoting a positive life experience (Ripple) is a 
case in practice. An example of transformational healthcare achieved through 
partnership working, Ripple is an innovative community-based project led by NHS 
West Midlands respiratory improvement programme and University hospitals 
Coventry and Warwickshire, which began in Coventry and helps patients with 
coronary obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Clinicians involved in the Coventry project have said that Ripple has 
revolutionised their attitude to their work and that there is renewed optimism 
within their community to transform patient care.

The Ripple project aims to improve wellbeing and reduce the high levels of 
anxiety, low self-esteem and social isolation experienced by individuals with 
severe COPD. Individuals are assessed and treated holistically, with their own 
strengths and overall health recognised and developed.

Patients with COPD meet on a weekly basis alongside volunteers, and community 
and health professionals to socialise and learn how to manage their disease, 
plan future activities and share experiences and information with each other.

This model of a community clinic involves expert support from specialist 
clinicians – including respiratory physicians, nurses and other health 
professionals – together with specialist self-management resources from the 
British Lung Foundation. A skilled community facilitator co-ordinates the 
activities, and there is always someone available to talk through patients’ 
hopes and fears.

The participants are mainly older residents from deprived wards in Coventry 
who, prior to their involvement in the project, were often socially isolated, 
had low levels of mental wellbeing, low levels of self-esteem and, at worst, a 
feeling that death is imminent.

The weekly meeting suggestions come from the patients themselves and have 
involved relaxation, yoga, quizzes, trips and bingo. Within these social 
activities there are opportunities to discuss symptoms with clinicians, learn 
the tips and tricks of effective self-management and encourage one another to 
take part in rehabilitation activities.

Preliminary findings indicate that this revolutionary clinic may pay for 
itself in terms of improved health and wellbeing. There have been reductions in 
acute admissions and improved quality of life for people living with this 
challenging long-term condition.

The improved reported ability of patients to self-manage their conditions 
includes peer-to-peer and clinician-to-patient sessions on how best to utilise 
medications, which we believe would translate into better efficacy and 
adherence to prescribed treatments.

Originally funded by the Health Foundation, the success of the Ripple project 
in Coventry has seen the programme expand to seven other sites across the 
Midlands and is now part-funded by NHS England. The Association of British 
Pharmaceutical Industry member company GlaxoSmithKline provided project 
management support, which gave much needed early boost for the Coventry pilot. 
The ABPI would offer similar support to an extended programme.

Ripple’s expansion brings together patients, carers, clinicians, voluntary and 
community groups and researchers from Coventry University. Over the coming 
months and years the programme will report back through patient reported 
outcome measures (Proms) and patient experience surveys to determine proper 
data on health outcomes. The wider programme, called Making Waves, hopes this 
evidence will demonstrate rigour and the transformational changes that can be 
made in treating and supporting those with COPD.

There are also exciting signs that the model can be transferred to other 
long-term conditions, however, this is a complex change which will require 
skilful leadership and management.

The Ripple project focuses on the role of medicines in real-world clinical 
practice, covering areas such as medicines optimisation and how outcomes from 
medicines use can be improved if patients are involved in their own healthcare 
in asset inventory. The project is proof that through collaboration change is 
indeed possible and that the NHS and its partners can flex and respond to the 
needs of communities in a positive way, appreciating the strengths and 
contribution of patients rather than treating them as problems to be solved. 
It’s a small but positive step in a new direction for the NHS and its patients .

 * Paul Dodd is programme specialist for the regional respiratory programme 
NHS South East Staffordshire and Seisdon Peninsula clinical commissioning 
group. Dr Alan Taylor is senior lecturer in leadership, management and service 
development school of health, Coventry University.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by the ABPI 
<http://www.abpi.org.uk/Pages/default.aspx>
