
I am sitting on my bedroom floor, typing by the dimmest of lights while baby 
Flora sleeps in the middle of our bed. I have often written this column softly, 
bent uncomfortably over my laptop, anxious not to wake her. Yesterday, after 
the fastest 12 months ever, she had her first birthday, which signals the end 
of this column. I've enjoyed writing it and been touched by the kindness of 
readers.

In the week leading up to Flora's birthday, things aren't going too well. 
First, Tilly appears at 3am (I know because I shout at J, "What time is it?" 
when I am woken up) looking green. "I'm sorry, Mum, I'm so sorry," she says. 
She has the winter vomiting bug and has thrown up in several places on the way 
from her bedroom, not quite making the toilet.

"You don't have to say sorry, it's not your fault," I say. I scrub at the 
large area of regurgitated food as merrily as I can while Tilly watches with 
interest. I can't recall any of the children ever making it to the toilet in 
time. I take her downstairs and we sit on the sofa, while Tilly moans at how 
bad the television is at 4am. I hug her and she is hot.

Two days later, it's Lydia who appears, just as I have got Flora off to sleep. 
According to J it is midnight.

"I'm sorry, Mum, I'm so sorry," she says. This time the vomit is so close to 
the toilet door it almost touches it. Maybe baby Flora will one day make it to 
the toilet in time. Meanwhile, I am desperate that she escapes this winter 
vomiting bug and is well for her first birthday. I organise a little tea party 
but don't invite any babies because we only know two and they are always busy. 
Maddy, our 19-year-old, who is more organised than I will ever be, comes back 
from university for the day.

We buy a few presents; a baby doll, plastic tea set and a baby jigsaw. They 
are outshone by the electric baby quad bike in bright pink and blue, bought by 
one of her godmothers, which makes proper car noises. "We don't get to go to 
many first birthday parties any more," says the same godmother.

"Well done – you've managed the first year," one of my sisters-in-law says to 
me.

"Yes, but badly," I say, curiously keen to put myself down.

I have tried hard to make my family happy and if I sometimes shout at my 
children (not Flora), forget to talk to my husband, leave my eyebrows to grow 
alarmingly bushy, only see my friends because I invited them to our wedding and 
go to work feeling guilty but wearing a suit – I am still doing my best. But I 
fall short when Sam phones after Flora's party, six days after disappearing to 
go to his new job. "You said you were going to stay at home now you have a 
job," I tell him because I hate it when he disappears. I scare myself by how 
mean I feel towards him. "I was going to look after some of the money you 
earned so you could save up to rent a flat."

"Well, I was sorting myself out," he says, "And now S has some of my money and 
I need a mobile phone or I can't work anymore."

I don't know why the phone call escalates into a row but, may God forgive me, 
I call him a waste of space and we hang up acrimoniously. Then I remember he 
doesn't know it's Flora's birthday and it feels disloyal when we've all 
celebrated not to tell him, so I call back but he's gone out. Tomorrow, I 
swear, once again, I will manage things better.

Tomorrow dawns and the sun is out and Flora, my sweet little girl, holds up 
her arms to me and promptly throws up all over my nightie. And I think, now 
I've stopped writing about it, who can I tell?
