
Lizzie on Angela

What were you hoping for?
Great conversation and a few smiles.


First impressions?
Very confident.

What did you talk about?
How many eligible lesbians there are for each of us in the world, how to 
survive a zombie apocalypse, and her newest skill, headstands.

Any awkward moments?
Only when I walked out with a nearly full bottle of wine.

Good table manners?
Perfect – she even let me try some of her pudding.

Best thing about Angela?
How she politely tolerated my long, meandering stories of nonsense.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Yes.

Describe her in three words
Intense, open, focused.

What do you think she made of you?
A bit of an oxymoron: a sensible risk-taker.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, but we were in the restaurant for three hours.

And... did you kiss?
A little hug at the station.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I wouldn’t have told so many long, meandering stories of nonsense.

Marks out of 10?
7.5.

Would you meet again?
It would be good to show her how my headstand is coming along.

Angela on Lizzie

What were you hoping for?
To spice up my Netflix Fridays.


First impressions?
Not like anyone I’d usually date.

What did you talk about?
How she takes professional risks, but not personal ones, how we push men out 
of the way to use weights at the gym.

Any awkward moments?
The crowd outside for Bryan Ferry. I had no idea who he was.

Good table manners?
You bet.

Best thing about Lizzie?
She took out the bottle of wine for me (so thoughtful!).

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Sure.

Describe her in three words
Easygoing, positive, ambitious.

What do you think she made of you?
Scatty, but easy to talk to.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, she had to get home.

Related: Blind date: ‘He kept telling me he’d won at dessert’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/23/blind-date-april-thomas> 

And... did you kiss?
Nope.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
Add some activity, like bowling.

Marks out of 10?
9.

Would you meet again?
Yes. I’m not sure if there was a romantic spark, but I like her energy.

• Angela and Lizzie ate at the Carnaby Brasserie in the Courthouse hotel 
<http://www.courthouse-hotel.com/restaurantsandbars-en.html>, London W1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial of Soulmates, 
go tosoulmates.theguardian.com <http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
