
Pigeon Point
The jewel in the crown of busy Crown Point, Tobago’s flagship beach (and its 
only fee-paying seashore) is the archetypal Caribbean swath of dazzling white 
sand, swaying palms and limpid turquoise waters, all overlooked by a 
palm-thatched gazebo at the end of a boat jetty. Perennially popular with 
locals and visitors alike, with several bars and restaurants, this is not a 
place to get away from it all, but it’s great for an easy-access beach day, or 
to try your hand at windsurfing and kiteboarding at the more rugged section 
around the headland.pigeonpoint.tt <http://pigeonpoint.tt/>

Related: Unmissable excursions in Tobago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/discover-tobago/2016/apr/15/unmissable-excursions-in-tobago>

Store Bay
The ultimate hangout for holidaying Trinidadians, who park their coolers under 
beach umbrellas and stake out a spot for the day, this compact slip of sand 
offers warm, clear waters, white shores and delicious local lunches from the 
string of kiosks backing the beach – try curry crab and dumplings, baked 
chicken and rice, or fresh fish with callaloo, stewed pigeon peas and Tobago 
“blue food”, aka dasheen.storebay.tt <http://storebay.tt/>

Mount Irvine Bay
Local families splash about in the shallows of the busy main beach, where a 
restaurant offers cold beers and flying fish with chips, and a surfing crowd 
descends from December to April to catch the seasonal waves, often partying on 
the sand as the sun goes down over Buccoo Point. On the other side of a rocky 
outcrop, the quieter “hotel beach”, administered by a nearby resort, offers 
better swimming and great snorkelling – if less in the way of atmosphere.

Englishman’s Bay
Perhaps the most beautiful of Tobago’s beaches, this is a perfect horseshoe of 
soft yellow sand, with palm trees leaning drunkenly out from a backdrop of 
dense forest, and deep, clear waters swishing over a healthy reef that offers 
fantastic snorkelling (bring your own gear). A lone bar sells drinks, lunches 
and local ice-cream – and don’t forget to take the obligatory overhead shot 
from the cliffs as you approach from the west.

Arnos Vale
Now that the resort here has closed, this beautiful strip of sand is a great 
place to indulge in some off-the-beaten-track beach time and some of the best 
snorkelling on the island, with bejewelled reefs and a rocky seabed sheltering 
everything from turtles to technicolour tiddlers. There are no facilities, so 
bring all your snacks and drinks, but there’s plenty of shade under the trees. 
It’s a secluded spot, so best visited in a group.

Castara Bay
With twin bays of fine blond sand and gentle waters that shelve off into the 
deepest of blue, Castara is a winning combination of fishing village and 
unpretentious resort. Pelicans and gulls mob the fleet of pirogues moored in 
Big Bay, where visitors help to pull in seine nets, lime with the boatmen at 
the Fisherman’s Cooperative and wander over to buy bread from formidable ladies 
presiding over the village’s traditional clay oven. Tucked between a 
green-swathed outcrop and jungle-slathered cliffs, compact Heavenly Bay offers 
great snorkelling and a friendly beach bar dispensing lunch and cold drinks.

Back Bay
Hidden from the coast road, this undeveloped beach between Mount Irvine and 
Pleasant Prospect has long been a secluded spot, although a new path from the 
main road has made it more accessible. Dotted with clumps of craggy black rock, 
its golden sands are licked by churning waters that offer vigorous swimming and 
bodysurfing; for a more gentle immersion, head to the western end of the beach 
where there’s a calm channel between the largest of the shoreside rocks.

Stonehaven Bay
Also known as Grafton Bay, this long, generous curve of coarse yellow-brown 
sand is overlooked by several hotels, separated from the beach by a line of 
greenery. Get past the breaking waves into the shallow, gin-clear waters, line 
up a sunset shot against the rocky outcrops along the shoreline, or look down 
over it all from Fort Bennett at its north-eastern end.

Pirate’s Bay
Take a 10-minute walk along a coastal track from Charlotteville to this 
spectacular strand of yellow sand, backed by dense, vine-smothered forest, and 
with fantastic snorkelling just offshore. The trail from the village delivers 
expansive views back over Man O’War Bay and the surrounding headlands, but if 
you’re not up for the walk (and the hundred-odd steps down to the sand), 
arrange for drop-off and pickup in a wooden fishing pirogue – just ask at the 
main beach. Bring drinks and snacks to last the day.

Little Rockley Bay
Cooled by constant winds off the Atlantic, and overhung with a strip of 
weather-bent palm trees, this is Tobago’s longest beach. Just west of 
Scarborough, its wide sands are rippled into beautiful fractals by the 
ever-present breeze, and are hard enough to offer comfortable walking, while 
the shallow waters are great for a splash-around. Keep an eye out for 
kiteboarders demonstrating offshore acrobatics.

How to get there
British Airways flights to Tobago leave from London Gatwick twice a week and 
include a brief stop in Antigua. Once on board, sit back, relax and enjoy their 
complimentary food and drink service alongside the latest in-flight 
entertainment and start your holiday as soon as you step on board. For more 
information, clickhere 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/destinations/trinidad-and-tobago/holidays-in-tobago?ref_site=2016Q2Tobago>
