
I examined Desmond Payne's nose with interest - discreetly, of course. Payne 
is an urbane, properly dressed man, with a mellifluous voice and a winning 
charm. He speaks with the authority of a man at the top of his profession. Like 
a great barrister, he is the unobtrusive master of his brief. He's the head 
distiller for Beefeater London Dry Gin, and there is nothing about gin on which 
he cannot provide an insight. Unlike most barristers, I suspect, Payne is 
clearly a man who gets immense pleasure from his job.

Turn off Kennington Road into Montford Place. On your right is a Tesco and, 
beyond, the hummocks of deflated gasometers. Opposite them is a fine Victorian 
building, once red as a guardsman's tunic, now darker, weathered by wind and 
rain. The words "Established 1820" stretch across the door, and up near the 
roof is the single word "Beefeater". This building wasn't always devoted to the 
production of a spirit. In its original incarnation, it was a pickle factory - 
Hayward's Military Pickles, to be exact. This is the third site where Beefeater 
has been distilled since James Burrough, an entrepreneurial chemist, first 
developed the heady brew. But no matter how often it moved, or how many 
followed in Burrough's footsteps, the recipe for Beefeater London Dry Gin has 
stayed the same.

Here's a short, technical description of how you make gin. You get some grain 
spirit, as neutral as you can find - "It should have character, but no 
flavour," Payne says. In Beefeater's case, it's provided by a specialist spirit 
distiller and is about 98% pure alcohol. You may distil it again to make sure 
it's as pure as you need. Then you add "botanicals", to which I will come back 
in a second. Distil in a pot still, then bottle. Not much to that, is there?

Oh yes there is - and that's where Payne's nose comes in. Nine botanicals go 
into each bottle of Beefeater. Juniper, of course, because that's what gin is 
really all about - it gives gin its oily, piney, medicinal essence; coriander 
seed, for spiciness and freshness; almond, for a marzipan note and soft spice; 
angelica root, for a leaf-mould earthiness; angelica seed, for a floral 
fragrance; liquorice, for a bitter-sweet quality; orris root, to hold these 
volatile essences; and dried lemon and Seville orange peels, for clean, citrus 
fragrance and flavour.

You'll have noted these are all organic ingredients; not in terms of 
production but in terms of nature - that is, they vary in character from year 
to year. It's Payne's job to make sure each batch of gin is as much like the 
last one as can be. So he has to do a lot of sniffing of the botanicals, to 
make sure they'll do the job. After all, they set one gin apart from another. 
In Beefeater's case, the right mix of the right amounts of the right botanicals 
is left to steep in deliciously alchemical copper pot stills for 24 hours 
before the distilling process begins, a process unique to Beefeater and one 
that helps give the finished article its distinctive complexity, vivacity and 
balance. "It's all about balance," Payne says. "About how ingredients work 
together. It's not about how many you have. Gin is like a good cocktail."

Talking of cocktails, how does he like his gin? "I love a gin and tonic. And I 
had a gimlet the other day: I'd forgotten what a fine cocktail that is. And, of 
course, a negroni - that's a very complex drink." Then we got on to discussing 
martinis and all the new cocktails bursting out all over. It was, all in all, a 
pretty agreeable way of spending a morning.

PS: There is an ongoing debate to fix on a definition for London dry gin, and, 
with its usual persistence, the EU is helping out. The working definition is 
that the botanicals must be added at the point of distillation, and not 
tinkered about with after. To Payne's chagrin, London gin does not, as yet, 
have to be distilled in London. I hope that will come.
