
If I had my way I would have a garden surrounded by a lovely hedge. One that 
birds could flit in and out of and where hedgehogs could roam the nether 
regions. If I had money to burn I would plant an instant one.

It’s possible to buy a semi-mature hedge that is lifted in metre-long sections 
and plonked where you need it, so you don’t have to wait a jot. Such things are 
very expensive; still, I have a lot more time for spending money on hedging 
than I do on, say, handbags.

For the rest of us, there is a cheaper, if slower option. Now is the time to 
establish deciduous, bare-root hedging plants (evergreens are nearly always 
planted as container-grown plants). The cheapest option is to buy whips, a wisp 
of a beginning, but they grow away quickly, and need half the maintenance an 
instant hedge would while it is establishing.

The rule of thumb is spacing a single row 30cm-60cm apart. Create a line, dig 
a trench and place plants appropriately, planting at the same depth they were 
in their pots. Prune back any leggy tips and water in well.

You’ll be looking at what you’re screening off for some years to come, so you 
could steal a classicJacques Wirtz <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacques_Wirtz>
 trick (consider this Belgian landscape gardener the grandaddy of cloud pruning 
and architectural hedging) and tier your hedging with something very 
quick-growing. You could use ivy trained up a chain-link fence with a 
low-growing hedge in front, giving a year-round evergreen backdrop, using very 
little space.

Related: Growing your own fruit and veg with Alys Fowler 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2015/dec/14/growing-your-own-fruit-and-veg-with-alys-fowler>

You can buy instant ivy hedge screening, but it is not cheap – at least £130 
for a 1m x 1.2m stretch. Or you can go the slower, cheaper route. Install a 
chain-link fence; it’s going to be there for years, so it needs to be durable. 
Buy two-litre plants and plant them 40cm apart, then plant your hedge in front. 
If you want to get fancy, you can create another tier, perhaps something 
evergreen, such as yew or box, and play around with depth and shades of green.

If this all sounds too architectural and clipped for your personality, there 
are looser, more informal choices. The cheapest is a native hedge: bought bare 
root now, this can cost as little as £5 per metre. A mixture of evergreen and 
deciduous, edible and wildlife friendly, you can stuff all sorts into this: 
holly, elderflowers, hazel, wild roses, crab apples, blackthorns, hawthorns, 
wild honeysuckles. Or you can create a feast for both you and the wildlife with 
edible elaeagnus, sea buckthorn or Japanese quince. Any of these could be used 
on their own for a delightful, informal flowering hedge.
