
It feels like I'm following Lesley McKenna, Cairngorm Mountain Resort local 
and triple Olympic snowboarder, into the abyss. Visibility is close to zero, 
the wind is howling and wet snow is battering my face. Moments earlier we'd 
been under blue skies with our jackets off; the day before had also been warm 
and sunny.

"I'm glad you're seeing it like this," shouts Lesley – about eight times 
before I hear her, "I didn't want you to get the wrong impression."

We hike on, hypnotised by the tips of our splitboard skis as they stick and 
slide up the hardpacked slope. A man skis past with his dog, then we see 
a middle-aged couple skiing down like beginners, though they must have been 
good hikers to have reached this spot in the first place. People around here 
seem to have a sense of adventure in their blood. A mountain rescue worker told 
me later that the most common on-piste injury is a dislocated artificial hip – 
even the older skiers have no interest in taking things easy.

We've skinned for two hours across the snow, plus occasional sprouts of 
heather, from the car park at the bottom of the Cairngorm ski station. Before 
long we reached the summit of Coire Laogh Mor, where the real fun begins. As we 
struggle to convert our skis back to snowboards for the run down in a 
snowstorm, I almost lose my vital binding pins in the snow – cue undignfied 
scrabble – and trying to pack a pair of unwieldy, sticky skins into a rucksack 
verges on slapstick anyway.

Still, two turns in and we're riding soft fresh snow; a few more and we've 
dropped below the blizzard. Our view clears and we're facing a stunning 
Highland scene of glens, lochs and rounded snowy peaks, giving way to green 
forests and russet heather hills lower down the valley. It's the kind of view 
that gives you cause to pause between turns rather than making the usual bomb 
to the bottom.

When Lesley had first suggested a snowboard-touring trip to the Cairngorm, 
telling me the terrain was, in parts, world class – with chutes, cornices and 
cliff drops that wouldn't look out of place in a snowboard movie – I was a 
little sceptical. Especially when warned that we'd need the weather gods to be 
on our side: aside from the fact that the area can be quite stormy, wind 
direction has a huge effect on where snow accumulates and which routes are 
possible, or enjoyable, at any given time.
 Skiers in Cairngorm 
But I'd also heard Scottish skiing was having a resurgence and was keen to 
check out Scotland's most-visited resort. Three of the past four winters have 
seen epic conditions, following a bleak couple of decades when low-cost flights 
to the Alps combined with poor snowfall had sent all but the true locals to 
European resorts. Or, as Lesley's dad, William McKenna, who has lived here 
since the early 1960s, put it, "People got a wee bit better off and the world 
got smaller."

Cairngorm's first chairlift was built in 1961. Before that, locals, including 
Lesley's grandfather, Chick Baxter, would hike up with super long skis, leather 
boots and rat trap bindings, skiing just two runs a day. The resort was at its 
most popular in the late 1970s and 1980s, when some weekends would see more 
than 50 coachloads of club skiers descend on the resort.

There were once 11 ski schools here; now there are just two. Prince Charles 
used to have lessons here – Balmoral is nearby, though his sons have always 
been more likely to head to the Alps.

Arriving just before 8am in Aviemore, the nearest town to the resort, by 
sleeper train, I find myself by 9.30am riding a Poma (button) lift up to the 
restaurant at 1,097m, just below the top of Britain's sixth-highest mountain. I 
can barely believe how good the snow is and how groomed the pistes, given that 
hasn't snowed for a few days. It helps that the slopes mostly face north.

Highlight runs include a steep black on the west wall, and the (red) White 
Lady, as well as Gullies number one and two on the east wall. There are plenty 
of greens and blues, too. After lunch, we head to the freestyle park, which has 
better jumps than many European resorts. The local standard is so high I stay 
on the sidelines. The week before the park hosted a Vans Hi Standard Series 
snowboarding event. This year, it takes place on 5 April, with new quarter- and 
half-pipes, created by a park shaper poached from Corvatsch, Switzerland.

Cairngorm Mountain Resort also has some of the best lift-accessed backcountry 
terrain in the country. We found heaps of fresh snow and scenery as amazing as 
the silence: we barely saw a soul, even though the resort pistes were actually 
quite busy.
 A snowboarder on Cairngorm Mountain 
There's something very cool about skiing a locals' mountain. What it lackd in 
scale compared with megaresorts, it often makes up for in character: at 
Cairngorm, some runs were cordoned off with wooden picket fences rather than 
orange netting. On menus a Scottish flag steers you to local produce, and 
there's a general lack of the stuffiness that plagues many resorts.

That could be why snowboarding fits in. Many European resorts banned it in the 
1980s but it was always allowed here, so animosity between skiers and boarders 
never developed. The locals have a refreshing approach to the weather – warning 
visitors to expect sheet rain, fog and icy roads. That said, the mountain does 
open in most conditions, and the funicular only stops for winds of 75mph or 
more.

As if to show me just what the weather is capable of, torrential rain closes 
the mountain on my last day. So we go mountain biking instead, bouncing off 
boulders and dodging frogs on paths around the kind of misty lochs and hill 
forts you usually only see in Hollywood biopics. It's brilliant.

Would I suggest you ditch your yearly trip to the Alps for a week in Scotland? 
Possibly not. The mountain isn't massive and it can get crowded at weekends. 
Should you go at least once? Yes, especially if you like the idea of ski or 
snowboard touring. Plus it's more affordable than the Alps.

• Travel was provided by Visit Scotland on the Caledonian Sleeper train from 
London to Aviemore, advance single fares start at £66.10 (0844 556 5636,
scotrail.co.uk <http://www.scotrail.co.uk/caledoniansleeper/index.html>). Or 
you can catch a Sleeper Bus (0871 2663333,uk.megabus.com 
<https://uk.megabus.com/>), advance single fare £35. Accommodation was provided 
at The Old Minister's House, Aviemore (01479 812181,theoldministershouse.co.uk 
<http://www.theoldministershouse.co.uk/>), which costs £55 per person per night 
B&B. A Cairngorm Mountain Resort (01479 861261,cairngormmountain.org 
<http://www.cairngormmountain.org/snowsports-day-tickets/>) one-day lift pass 
costs £33.50 for an adult, £20 for under 16s and £90 for a family (two adults, 
two juniors). Guided ski and snowboard touring trips can be organised through 
G2 Outdoor (01479 811008,g2outdoor.co.uk 
<http://www.g2outdoor.co.uk/winter-activities>). Further information: 
ski.visitscotland.com <http://ski.visitscotland.com/> 

Sam Haddad is the editor of Cooler Magazine <http://cooler.mpora.com/>

• This article was amended on 3 February. It referrred to devolution rather 
than independence. The sentence has been taken out.
