
The rhythm of my weekends revolves around running. Sometimes that might mean 
pre-race nerves, pre-race meals, post-race drinks. Mostly it just means 
Saturday morning track sessions, Sunday morning long runs. With no races 
imminent, and therefore no self-imposed ‘pressure’ to be on good form, both are 
at their most relaxed and fun. Track sessions are social - ok, so there’s a 
limit to my conversational ability at 600m rep pace, but in the warm up, the 
recoveries and the cool down there is plenty of time to gossip, catch up, talk 
race plans and even - gasp! - talk about non-running things. Then the cafe 
after for tea and cake, of course.

Sundays are solitary. I almost always do my long runs alone - recently, to the 
accompaniment of audiobooks (suggestions for good ones below, please!). There’s 
a certain pace that’s required for this - anything too fast and I lose track of 
the plot, find I’ve skipped big sections and have to go back later and fill 
them in. But at relaxed, pace-doesn’t-matter speed, they are perfect. Except, 
of course, if they involve something particularly funny or particularly sad. 
Not sure who looks more mad - the runner chuckling to themselves or the runner 
wiping away a tear.

The point of all this is that someone asked me the other day (apropos the 
parkrun story) why I run so much. It wasn’t your classic “don’t know why you do 
that, you’ll bugger your joints/knees/hips” (delete as appropriate) 
incomprehension, just a query as to why I run virtually every day. “Wouldn’t 
you gain more from swapping an easy run for a class or something?”. Maybe, yes. 
But my head needs to run as much as - no, much more than, my body does. And for 
me, every different run of the week fulfills a different purpose. A training 
purpose, a mood-boosting purpose, but also a little tick on the calendar of the 
week. A rhythm within the day, a focal point, and ditto within the week. 
Without that rhythm, I feel slightly aimless. So why do I run? Because I need 
to. Because I want to. Because, well, what else would I do?

So, enough of my musings. Over to you - any Brighton marathon runners 
reporting in for achy, triumphant accounts? London taperers getting twitchy and 
developing three minor ailments before breakfast? As always, I want to hear 
your weekend woes and triumphs below the line.
