
All eyes at the BBC and most press interest are, understandably, focused on 
the government’s forthcoming charter review white paper. Every twist and turn 
is pored over (will the BBC be forced to sell this or do that?), briefed on by 
government “sources” and gleefully covered by an agenda-driven press. But truth 
be told the BBC privately believes the white paper and, critically, the funding 
arrangements behind it – only an £800m cut as theBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is forced to take up the cost of over 
75s’ licence fees – is essentially a done deal. So on that front director 
general Tony Hall’s big test is almost over.

Far more testing and potentially significant for the BBC in the longer term, 
and what everyone at the BBC is talking about internally, however, are Hall’s 
plans for a very major reorganisation of the whole structure of the BBC. TV and 
Radio directorates will disappear to be replaced with three new “content 
focused” divisions – loosely titled Inform, Educate and Entertain. Content 
commissioning along with TV and radio channels will be spread out amongst the 
three divisions, based on which they’re thought to fit best. So news and Radio 
5 Live into Inform, BBC1, drama, entertainment, comedy, Radios 1, 2 and BBC3 
into Entertain, and documentaries, factual, Radio 4 – or at least those bits of 
it that haven’t been snaffled by Entertain – into Educate. With the three 
divisions overseen by an all-powerful director of content. All in the name of 
preparing the BBC for the fully converged digital world where content, as 
opposed to delivery platforms, really is king.

In fact this is not in principle a new idea at all. BBC strategists have been 
developing plans for something like this for literally decades. Greg Dyke 
adopted some of it, giving more power to genre commissioning heads as opposed 
to TV channel controllers in the belief that only they would have the “big 
picture” for content in a converging world. Mark Thompson who followed him – 
and who was the only DG to have run a major TV channel – backed away from 
advancing further down Dyke’s path, believing it was way too far ahead of where 
audiences actually were in their consumption of BBC services, and thus allowed 
the traditional TV and radio channels to reassert their creative dominance. 
George Entwistle, however, was completely committed to breaking up TV and Radio 
and I remember being briefed by him on his plans. Sadly for him he didn’t get a 
chance to even begin to implement them.

Which brings us to Hall and the closest the BBC’s strategy civil service (as 
one very senior executive described them) have ever got to the fulfilment of 
their digital dream. Trouble is, though, that while they might look great in 
the obligatory power-point presentations, these plans are riddled with profound 
operational difficulties – many of which bring with them, once people 
understand what’s at stake, the potential for huge public rows. So much so that 
the announcement of the scheme has been postponed at least twice and is now not 
due to take place until after the white paper is published later this month.

For a start dismantling the traditional directorates overseeing TV and Radio 
is genuinely fraught with risk, once you realise how they work. To the 
strategist they just look like dinosaurs from a bygone age fixated on all the 
wrong things. In reality however the BBC’s quality control functions, which 
guarantee the quality of its output, are absolutely plugged into those channel 
structures. Who will do that and with what lines of accountability? Secondly, 
given that all the mainstream TV channels and most of the radio stations run 
content that might be thought of as coming from all three of the new 
directorates, where does the overview function currently exercised by the 
channels and their controllers overseen by the TV and Radio directorates sit? 
And thirdly where does the audience fit into all this, given that consumption 
of BBC content is still overwhelmingly via traditional channels? The potential 
failure to grasp the importance of channel controllers to the BBC’s 
communication with the viewing/listening public is completely wrong-headed. 
They need looking after and nurturing, and channels need to be coordinated as 
well as competitive with each other. All of which is currently done by the TV 
and Radio directorates which will no longer exist.

These are the sorts of critical operational details that high-level 
strategists (and their bean-counter chums in finance and HR who just love the 
idea of breaking up “obstructive” traditional baronies) tend not to see. This 
is a plan that raises many more questions – big and important ones – than 
answers and currently looks (from the inside at least) to be very far from 
fully thought-through. Some talented senior executives have already left and 
others are preparing to follow them. In fact it is little short of playing with 
fire and will most likely create far more serious and far-reaching difficulties 
than the government or its white paper.
