
The battle for control of Starwood, owner of the W and Sheraton hotel chains, 
has intensified after a Chinese-led consortium returned with a sweetened $14bn 
(£9.8bn) offer designed to wrest the company from rival suitor Marriott 
International.


The US hotel operator, which has already agreed to sell itself to Marriott for 
$13.6bn, said it had received a weekend approach likely to result in a superior 
offer.

Starwood said the consortium, headed by Anbang Insurance Group, had offered 
$82.75 per share, in an all-cash deal that valued the group at $14bn. The 
revised offer betters the cash-and-shares offer on the table from Marriott, 
which at the moment still has the backing of the Starwood board.

The rival suitors have been forced to dig deeper to gain and regain the upper 
hand. Starwood accepted an improved bid of $21 per share in cash and 0.80 
shares from Marriott only a week ago, and if it reneges on the agreement will 
have to pay a $450m break fee.

Related: Chinese investors rival Marriott with $14bn offer for Starwood hotel 
chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/14/starwood-hotels-china-anbang-insurance-group-marriott-sheraton>

Anbang is on its way to becoming a big industry player following a series of 
deals including the purchase of New York’s Waldorf Astoria for almost $2bn in 
2014. Once a provincial car insurer, it has snapped up insurance companies in 
South Korea, Belgium and the Netherlands, as well as office buildings in Canada 
and the Belgian banking operations of Dutch insurer Delta Lloyd. To buy 
Starwood, Anbang has teamed up with China-based Primavera Capital and US 
private equity investor JC Flowers & Co.

Anbang’s renewed approach comes despite speculation in the Chinese media that 
regulators could be minded to block the deal by enforcing a rule that prevents 
insurance companies from investing more than 15% of their total assets abroad.

The Starwood board said: “There can be no assurance that discussions will 
result in a binding proposal from the consortium, that the Starwood board will 
determine that any such proposal is a ‘superior proposal’ or that a transaction 
with the consortium will be approved or consummated on any particular terms or 
at all.”

Marriott responded to the Anbang offer by insisting that its deal with 
Starwood, which would create the world’s largest hotel group, with more than 
5,500 properties, was the “best course for both companies”. “The combined 
company will offer stockholders significant equity upside and greater long-term 
value,” it said.

Bill Crow, an analyst at US-based financial services firm Raymond James, said: 
“Marriott has the financial capacity and the wherewithal to push its bid up 
higher. However, so much of the transaction is based on Marriott’s current 
share price, I think investors would be less than thrilled if it increased its 
offer materially at this juncture.”




