
Feminism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> will be included in the 
A-level politics syllabus, the schools minister Nick Gibb has said, after 
campaigners criticised the government for dropping all references to the 
movement from its new draft curriculum. Gibb said all politics students would 
be given “the opportunity to study the core ideas of feminism” and that exam 
boards were already making changes to the final content.

Gibb admitted the government had not properly recognised the role of female 
political thinkers in its draft plans – which included Mary Wollstonecraft as 
the sole movement’s voice – and said more women would now be included in the 
course content.

His comments followed an outcry over proposals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/20/feminism-axed-a-level-politics-dfe-draft-protest>
 to teach three core political ideologies – socialism, liberalism and 
conservatism – but to drop feminism as a named topic.

Gibb indicated that the education secretary and equalities minister, Nicky 
Morgan, had intervened to make the change after a consultation on the plans 
revealed widespread opposition

During a Commons debate on the issue, Gibb said: “The final content will set 
out clearly those female political thinkers whose work should be studied. 
Suggestions have included Simone de Beauvoir, Hannah Arendt, Rosa Luxemburg, to 
name but a few.

“Feminism is an optional area of study in current specifications. It was never 
our intention to exclude the study of feminism from the reformed A-level and we 
said we would listen to the consultation which opened on 3 November and closed 
on 14 December.

Gibb was responding to Labour’s Rupa Huq, the MP for Ealing Central and Acton, 
who said the original decision sent a harmful message at a time when the 
movement still had great importance, especially considering the wide gender 
imbalance in politics today.

Huq pointed out that only 29.4% of MPs were female and school groups she took 
on tours around parliament always asked about the lack of women.

Opening the debate, she said: “This proposed syllabus implies that women do 
not belong in politics and that their contributions are not significant. It’s a 
toxic message and it’s been condemned roundly by loads of people, including the 
Girl Guides – you wouldn’t think that they are a radical dangerous group 
usually.

“This mooted rewriting of history is nothing short of sinister – it’s deleting 
women.”

Gibb said: “Following the consultation on the politics A-level, exam boards 
are making changes to the final content to respond to the concerns raised and 
we will publish our response shortly but I can assure you that the final 
politics A-level will give all students the opportunity to study the core ideas 
of feminism.”
