
Manchester-born Zack Charilaou was a teenager when he made his first foray 
into the world of wine, much to the amusement of his friends. A sommelier at 
the steakhouse he worked at for pocket money sparked his interest, and seven 
years on, he is an award-winning sommelier and wine director atM Restaurants 
<http://mrestaurants.co.uk/>.

What set you on the path to becoming a sommelier?

I have been a sommelier for about seven years now, but I didn’t start out 
doing wine. I started at Gaucho restaurant when I was about 15, helping out as 
a weekend job for pocket money. If you’d asked me then about wine, I wouldn’t 
have had a clue. But the director of wine at Gaucho made it interesting and I 
fell into it. The team would have trainings and I’d be allowed to come along 
and sniff the wine and have a cheeky taste.

There was a bit of banter from my friends; thinking about how I grew up and 
what we did as kids, this wasn’t something I imagined becoming.

What was it that made wine interesting?

Because of my age it felt like quite a sophisticated thing, I felt like I was 
talking about a grownup subject. Luckily it turned out I was technically quite 
good and was able to pick things up quickly; I was told I had a good nose and a 
good palate. If you aren’t able to follow from early on, you lose credibility 
and interest.

What does a restaurant sommelier typically do? 

One side of it is office based and looking at trends. What are people 
drinking? What is doing well? I make sure we have the right wine in stock and 
that the restaurant has good options and credibility in its wines. Most of that 
comes from reading trade magazines and having conversations when you are out 
and about. Networking in the trade is important – I am talking to people all 
the time; from the people who pick the grapes to the importers – we’re a very 
close-knit community in the wine industry and everyone talks to each other.

The rest of the time you are training staff and making sure everyone is 
passionate and interesting on the floor. You can’t speak to every customer at 
busy times so you need to make sure the staff are solid and really good at 
helping with the wine list as well.

Related: Bill Bailey: 'Comedy is mercurial, you can’t quite get hold of it' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/apr/19/bill-bailey-comedy-is-mercurial-you-cant-quite-get-hold-of-it>

What are the markings of a good sommelier? 

I think it is about personality more than anything. I would say the ratio 
between personality versus knowledge is 80/20. If you’re a good talker and 
someone who can break down quite a difficult, pretentious subject into 
something a lot more accessible and easy to understand, you’d make a good 
sommelier. As long as you have some interest and passion for the subject itself 
too.

Most people don’t care about the technical elements like soil types, so you 
need to be able to make wine interesting and relevant. Technical knowledge is 
still important though, you can’t survive without it because you never know 
when you’ll get a table that wants to know all that information.

You won’t make it as a sommelier if you are narrow minded in terms of the 
artistic side of wine; its different flavours and smells. I have come across 
people who say; “No, red wine smells like red wine and white wine smells like 
white wine”. If that is your approach, it will go against you. You need to have 
passion and enjoy it – if you don’t get excited smelling wine or getting to 
taste an old wine then you’ve probably got very little chance of making it as a 
sommelier – and why would you want to?

Do you ever get difficult customers, or customers who are intimidated by the 
wine list?

I very rarely get difficult customers. I have had awkward guests, who have 
been completely wrong about wines but try to show off their knowledge. 
Chardonnay and chablis, for example, are the same; the first refers to the 
grape and the other refers to the region, but you have people saying they like 
one but not the other. You have to be sensitive; my style isn’t to show people 
up and it is really important not to get defensive or cause a scene.

To help people find the wine they’d like, I try to use descriptive words and 
analogies that people can relate to, rather than anything pretentious. Words 
like smooth and dry, silky, soft, juicy. And if someone goes for the cheapest 
bottle, you should respect that as a sommelier.

How do you keep your knowledge fresh?

You need to be doing a lot of tastings in your free time to keep up with the 
trends; it isn’t difficult to do that. When you go home and have a glass of 
wine, instead of just drinking it, give yourself a couple of minutes to dissect 
it; the look, the smell, the taste. And then you can enjoy it the same as 
everybody else.

 What kinds of misconceptions do you encounter when you say you’re a sommelier?

People assume a sommelier will be someone with a curled moustache and bow tie, 
wearing a white glove and being very posh at the table. There is a stereotype 
of sommeliers being classically French, something elegant associated with fine 
dining. That idea can be very intimidating from the diner’s point of view. But 
it shouldn’t be; if you spend enough time in the wine trade you’ll see it isn’t 
like that at all.

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
