
Judges feel unappreciated, demoralised and resent cuts to their pay, according 
to a recently retired member of the court of appeal.

Interviewed in the barristers’ magazine Counsel 
<http://www.counselmagazine.co.uk/articles/interview-sir-richard-aikens>, Sir 
Richard Aikens says work on the bench is becoming less attractive.

His complaints echo remarks made by the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of 
Cwmgiedd 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/13/uk-most-senior-judge-says-justice-has-become-unaffordable-to-most>
, this year that judges, though comparatively well-paid, feel they are not 
valued.

Aikens, who left the court of appeal in November, said: “The biggest challenge 
for the English judiciary at present is the danger that there will not be 
enough high-class candidates for the higher judiciary in the future … 
Successive governments have taken it for granted that there will always be 
enough people of sufficient calibre who are willing to go to the bench, despite 
the fact that the work is getting increasingly harder.”

Aikens explained there was more pressure “on judges’ independence apart from 
anything else”, less and less support from administrative staff because of 
staff and funding cuts as well as “a cut in judicial pay of over 20% in real 
terms in the last five years”.


He added: “The very demanding work of the higher judiciary is done despite 
very little thanks or appreciation from either government ministers or the 
higher civil service, who seem to hold the judges in poor regard.

“In my experience just before I retired, morale in the higher judiciary was at 
a very low ebb. They feel very [unloved]. How should it be dealt with? A good 
start would be for the government to accept, without qualification, the 
recommendations of the next report of the Senior Salaries Review Body on 
judges’ pay.”

The annual salary for an appeal judge is £202,668. It is due to rise to 
£204,695 from April.


Asked about judges’ long holidays, Aikens pointed out that judicial work 
extended far beyond hours spent in court. “I always spent a good part of my 
vacations writing reserved judgments or writing lectures I had agreed to give, 
or doing some report or other administrative task that I had been asked to do,” 
he said.

“Neither politicians nor the senior civil service, nor the media or the 
general public appreciate what goes on when senior judges are not sitting in 
court. The sittings are only a comparatively small part of the work done by the 
high court, court of appeal and the supreme court. Judges are, perhaps, not 
very good at explaining this and they may have to do so more in the future.”

Before becoming a judge in 1993, Aikens, 67, was at the commercial bar, one of 
the best-paid branches of the legal profession.
