
The public can be proud of the influence Great Britain has on the world stage. 
We think big, and inspire others to do likewise. Nowhere is this more evident 
than in our record on international development and aid which saves and 
improves millions of lives every day. Over the last five years alone, UK aid 
has helped more than 13 million people with emergency food aid and given nearly 
63 million access to water, sanitation and hygiene services. UK investment in 
immunisation and education saves a child’s life every two minutes and ensures 
11 million children go to school.

That said, UK taxpayers rightly demand those who spend their money – be they 
government, the UN, NGOs or private companies – do so transparently, 
effectively and ensure their generosity is safe from exploitation and abuse. 
Anything less undermines the public’s trust and jeopardises this life-saving 
work.

Parliament will debate our commitment to spending 0.7% of national income on 
aid tomorrow. We support the demand that all involved in the provision of aid 
should act with the utmost accountability and give value for money.

But ending our international commitment to spend just 7p of every £10 of our 
national wealth on aid sends all the wrong signals – not just to the other 
richer nations of the world that we are encouraging to step up to this mark, 
but also to hundreds of millions of the world’s poorest who we are supporting 
to lift out of poverty once and for all.

Girish Menon chief executive, ActionAid UK; Saira O’Mallie UK director 
(interim), The ONE Campaign; Loretta Minghella

chief executive, Christian Aid

Ben Jackson, chief executive, Bond Network

Chris Bain, director, CAFOD

Laurie Lee, chief executive, CARE International UK

Rose Caldwell, executive director, Concern Worldwide UK

Amy Agnew, Europe director, Global Citizen

Jane Waterman, executive director, International Rescue Committee-UK

Imran Madden, UK director, Islamic Relief

James Whiting, executive director, Malaria No More UK

Simon Cooke, CEO, Marie Stopes International

Simon O’Connell, executive director, Mercy Corps Europe

Mark Goldring, chief executive, Oxfam GB

Mark Lister, chief executive, Progressio

Mark Nowottny, director of strategy, Restless Development

Tanya Steele, Save the Children interim CEO

Philip Goodwin, chief executive, VSO International

Michael Penrose, executive director, Unicef UK

Barbara Frost, chief executive, WaterAid

Parliament must rule the public

Laurence Perry (Letters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/jun/04/observer-letters-proportional-representation-not-referendum>
) makes some useful points regarding the role of referendums in a democracy 
with a less than equitable voting system. One thing is certain: whatever the 
method by which they were elected, the present parliament is overwhelmingly in 
favour of Britain remaining in the European Union.

If the public is persuaded by self-interested parties on the Brexit side to 
vote to leave the EU, what ought to be the attitude of sitting MPs? Should they 
allow the House of Commons to become a rubber stamp for decisions made outside 
its walls?

Parliamentarians are free to use their judgment on the evidence available to 
them, of which, in the present case, one (but not the only or arguably the most 
important) part will be the referendum result. Failure to take other factors 
into account would be to betray the memory of those who gave their lives in the 
English Civil War, which established the supremacy of parliament, not voters in 
a referendum, in the conduct of the nation’s affairs.
Mike Timms
Iver, Bucks

No place for private schools

We need to abolish private education (“Give the posh new finishing schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/05/dont-purge-posh-invite-them-to-join-us>
”, Comment) because it engenders inequalities of income, property ownership and 
social mobility.

If private education were abolished those benefiting from it would almost 
certainly be in a position to enrol their children in the very best state 
schools, who would then continue on to their desired university and careers 
supported by parents with even more money to spend than before.

However, their children would have been socialised by the diversity of fellow 
students in wearing the same uniform, playing in the same teams, choirs and 
orchestras. After a few generations, this would lead to a less fractured 
society, while the higher aspirations of the “newcomers” would inspire the rest 
to strive for better. Would that any government could summon up the courage to 
begin the abolition.
Neil Wigglesworth
Forton
Lancashire

Mental health system is failing



The death of 14-year-old Amy El-Keria exposes a mental health system that 
places a child far away from home into a private setting operating dangerous 
and grossly inadequate systems of care (“Child deaths in Priory hospitals 
provoke calls to cancel NHS contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/04/child-deaths-priory-hospitals-cancel-nhs-contract>
”, News).

This case calls into question the continuing marketisation of children’s 
mental health. These deaths are shrouded in secrecy with no independent 
investigation process and no central recording or oversight.

The truth about Amy’s death would have been buried were it not for the 
family’s relentless fight and a jury inquest.

Sadly, Amy’s death is not an isolated one. INQUEST is working with the 
families of other children and young people who have died while in receipt of 
overstretched, under-resourced mental health services. An urgent independent 
review of mental health services for children and young people must follow. 
Deborah Coles


Director, INQUEST
London N4

A teensy bit over the top?

Muhammad Ali was a great boxer. But though I’ve fond memories of his great 
fights, don’t you think that the entire first five pages of the main paper, a 
12-page pull-out plus a further eight page special was overdoing it a little?


Tim Mickleburgh
Grimsby
Lincolnshire
