
My kitchen is … quaint. It’s rather small and right in the middle of my 1900 
farmhouse, with a dining room off of one end, and a breakfast nook off the 
other side in New England. Being the size it is, there’s not much room for cute 
extras – it’s more functional than charming. We have open shelving for our 
dishes, jars and vessels, and some artwork on the walls. We like barn wood and 
antique kitchen tools, with a touch of modern design, a juxtaposition of old 
and new.

My favourite kitchen tool is … my stereo. I’m often in the kitchen for hours 
at a time by myself. I listen to the news in the morning, podcasts later on and 
I usually end the day with a glass of wine and Whitney Houston, Shirley Bassey, 
or some Bollywood.

My storecupboard staple is … maple syrup. Here in Vermont it’s almost a rite 
of passage to tap a couple trees and make your own. Whenever we have a dinner 
party, it’s pretty much garanteed someone will bring a bottle as a gift. 
Subsequently, almost everything I make starts with maple syrup – glazing a ham, 
making salad dressing, frying up a pork chop, baking bread. Just last night I 
made a spicy stir-fry with a splash. It’s my go-to source of sweetness.

When I’m starving … I make something Mexican: enchiladas, tacos, even nachos 
(because we’re grownups and we can have nachos for dinner!). We’ve an endless 
supply of meat on the farm – we raise our own pork and poultry, as well as 
raising goats for milk – so as long as I have an avo and a lime, I can whip up 
a meal in a matter of minutes. We also always have our own lard, so I can 
always make authentic tortilla.

My culinary inspiration is … the seasons. In fact, since we started farming, 
they’re not just an inspiration – everything we eat is about the time of year. 
Right now it’s ramps [wild leeks]; soon, it’ll be asparagus and rhubarb, and 
then berries. We spent the winter eating potatoes, roots, meat … so we’re ready 
for springtime greens.

My best-kept kitchen secret is … the power of using good ingredients. A lot of 
people have a tendency to pick up a bargain. But – certainly in baking – good 
flour, organic dark chocolate, eggs from chickens that are well cared for, it 
all makes such a difference.

My current obsession is … tarts.Not something you see in the States that much. 
I love how much more delicate they are, compared to pies. Right now, I’m 
working on a rich buttery shell with a layer of soft caramel topped with dark 
chocolate ganache and pink Himalayan salt.

Everything tastes better with … butter, of course – no explanation needed! 
I’ve even been known to use melted butter in a salad dressing.

When I go shopping I … am meticulous. And always, always with a list, 
organised by section, and aisle, wherever possible. It’s the pastry chef in me. 
I don’t think I ever divert from the list – unless avocados are on sale and the 
price and quality is right.

For dinner tonight … we’re having burgers, to celebrate the fact that it’s the 
most beautiful day of the year so far. With roast potatoes and a cabbage salad.

 * Thomas McCurdy is a farmer and a pastry chef at Ardelia Farm and Co 
<http://www.ardeliafarm.com/>; @ <https://www.instagram.com/ardeliafarm/>
ardeliafarm <https://www.instagram.com/ardeliafarm/> 