
We’re still together after 35 years because I refused to ever consider 
splitting up, although Matt’s been unfaithful to me for most of that time. We 
met at university and he’s all the classic things – tall, good looking, bright, 
funny. Very few women can resist him. I’m not excusing him as the pain he’s 
caused me is immeasurable but he was sent to boarding school aged eight and 
from a very early age the only person he could depend on was himself.

I watched as Matt broke one heart after another, always warning them – “I’ll 
never settle down, I’m a really bad lot” – but they were all willing to give it 
a try. He was from a very army family and I knew that I was the “right” sort of 
girl for him so I played it very cool, which he wasn’t used to.

It took all my willpower not to fall into his bed but I finally agreed to 
dinner and an old-fashioned courtship. We got engaged on my 22nd birthday. I 
managed to keep his hands off me until our wedding was booked and by the time I 
was pregnant with our elder son Tom three years later, I was sure Matt was 
tamed.

He worked hard, earned a lot and we both loved socialising. I’m a teacher and 
when we had the big chat about child care I happily agreed to give up work. We 
didn’t plan on having Simon quite so quickly and having two children under two 
was as tiring as everyone says it is, but I was proud of myself – getting fit 
really quickly, looking good and always ready to jump into bed with Matt when 
the babies were sleeping.

After Simon’s christening, I wanted to get him out of his slippery christening 
robes so I left everyone eating and headed upstairs. I opened Simon’s bedroom 
door and Matt and Chloe, my best friend from school, were having sex on the 
teddy rug on the floor, so engrossed that they didn’t hear me. I swiftly closed 
the door and tiptoed to our bedroom, shutting that door loudly.

Less than five minutes later, Matt appeared, totally hyper, which I ignored. 
He stripped Simon out of the christening gown before dancing him round the room 
and making him laugh. When we went back down to our guests, Chloe was sitting 
on her fiancé’s lap and barely glanced at us.

Simon was cranky and I sat up half the night with him, going over everything 
in my head. I felt sick and full of rage. I wanted to pull Matt out of our bed 
and scream at him but I knew that if I did, there was no going back. Even if we 
didn’t split up there would be terrible rows and our lovely, happy life would 
be disrupted. I had no idea how long they had been seeing each other but by 
morning I was sure of only two things – we were staying married and from now on 
I would know everything.

I was pretty sure Chloe would be history soon, but I was always watching, 
wondering who was his latest conquest. I was convinced that if I said nothing, 
he would never leave me for anyone. He loved me and the boys, he loved our 
lifestyle and his good name was very important to him – no way he’d give all 
that up for a fleeting affair. It wasn’t easy and it was tiring being on full 
alert. I remember at a PTA wine tasting watching Matt talking to another mum, 
who was about seven months pregnant. I was actually relaxing and thinking that 
surely someone like that was safe but then Matt slipped his hand up the back of 
her maternity blouse and round to cup her breast for a second. She beamed at 
him, while I stood in horror wondering if it was his baby she was carrying.

When Laura was born I think Matt was faithful to me for months because he was 
so besotted with her, but about a year later everyone started using mobile 
phones and that opened up lots more misery. I checked Matt’s phone constantly 
and although his texts were always brief, some of the stuff his women sent was 
practically pornographic. That alternated with long periods of peace where he 
didn’t appear to be seeing someone else and that was always enough to convince 
me I was doing the right thing. The children doted on their dad and I didn’t 
want them to have a broken home or lose out financially if Matt had to run two 
homes. I still loved him and refused to let any other woman win over me, but 
more than anything I was convinced that if I just hung on that there would come 
a time when his libido would calm down and I’d be enough for him.

Once, after too much wine, I asked him if he had ever thought about being 
unfaithful and he acted shocked and dismayed

I did get tired of dropping friends I knew Matt was seeing but that was my 
limit – I didn’t want to see them hanging round him. Some of my girlfriends 
tried to warn me but I cut them off as even acknowledging what they were saying 
meant I would have to do something about it. The thought of being pitied was 
the worst of all but I became an expert at smiling outwardly through it all, 
especially at social events where I knew I was talking to someone who was 
sleeping with my husband. There was no way I was going to be the pathetic 
frump, so I made sure I was as slim and elegant as ever and breezed through 
life.

Our youngest child, Emma, was two when we hit a really dangerous point. Matt 
was seeing someone new and I was still reading his texts, though I’d also 
started on his email as he never used passwords. This woman was seriously pushy 
and for the first time it looked as if Matt might confess or even leave me so I 
simply stopped in my tracks.

I didn’t talk, eat, sleep, wash, look after the children. Within a week, he 
had me at the doctor, completely out of his depth as family life ground to a 
halt. I don’t know if I had a breakdown or if I engineered it, if I’m honest. 
All I knew was that all my hard work wasn’t going to waste now and it was even 
worth being away from the children as I was hospitalised and Matt was left to 
get on with it.

Six weeks of juggling everything without me worked. I was sure the other woman 
was out of the picture, though I could no longer access his phone or email as 
he was using passwords. He probably guessed I’d been prying but said nothing. 
Once, after too much wine, I asked him if he had ever thought about being 
unfaithful and he acted completely shocked and dismayed – if I’d pushed the 
conversation it would have ended, not mended, the marriage. My way was best.

That was 20 years ago and I think he stopped seeing other women about five 
years ago, when we both reached 50 and our first grandchild was born.

Our second grandchild is on the way and Matt and I do almost everything 
together. He still works long hours but we cook, go to Italian classes, 
socialise, walk the dogs and spend a lot of time with our family, who are all 
very close.

This is our time now and my prize for sticking it out is every anniversary 
celebrated, every quiet moment together relished. Very occasionally I look at 
him and feel so angry I could scream but I recognise that I made my own choice. 
I outlasted any woman foolish enough to think the affair would lead to 
something and, in the end, it was worth it.

As told to Joan McFadden. Kate Simpson is a pseudonym
