
The company responsible for the marking of 600,000 pupils’ Sats papers 
appeared to blame its own markers’ equipment last week for problems 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/26/primary-tests-trial-warwick-mansell>
 that, we are told, had the system almost grinding to a halt.

An English reading marker got in touch to say that Pearson’s ePEN software, 
which for the first time this year is being used to markSats 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/sats> papers, was freezing for up to five 
minutes between questions. This source and another have told us that the system 
cannot cope with large numbers of teacher-markers who log on at peak times, 
such as after school in term time, or during half term last week.

An email sent to English markers last Tuesday from Pearson’s “marking leaders” 
admits that “some of you are experiencing issues with ePEN running slowly”.

“We have carried out an investigation into this and in the majority of cases 
we have found it is an issue with the computer or internet connection being 
used … we have seen better ePEN performance from those markers using 
cable-connected broadband and not wireless.”

But our first source is incandescent. She has a wired connection, she says, and
Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> had stipulated its 
technology requirements in markers’ contracts, so should not be using that as 
an excuse.

She says: “Come about 5pm, the system is running so slowly that it’s unusable. 
It’s like trying to work on an old ZX Spectrum PC. They are trying to say it’s 
markers’ own technology that is the problem, but it’s not.”

Results are supposed to be released to schools on 7 July.

A Pearson spokeswoman said: “We will be giving schools their marks on time. 
Moving to online marking has been a significant task and we’re grateful for the 
support we’ve had from our marking colleagues. Where some markers have 
experienced problems we have been able to work with them quickly to resolve any 
issues.”

Sats results annulment ‘extremely serious’


Is any action going to be taken against a school whose 2014 Sats results were 
annulled after it was found guilty of test “maladministration”? We have yet to 
learn of anyone being held to account by Lewisham local authority after the 
government’s Standards and Testing Agency found against one of the south London 
borough’s schools, Grinling Gibbons primary. The school was identified in the 
Sunday Times last November as England’s best-performing state primary in recent 
years, based on its 2013 results. But, as werevealed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/dec/16/mark-steel-academies-sponsors-ofsted-dfe-local-authority>
 in December, Grinling Gibbons’s 2014 results were not published in league 
tables pending an investigation by the STA.

After the STA reportedly annulled the school’s results 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/top-primary-school-has-exam-results-annulled-after-investigation/>
 for two Sats maths papers and a spelling test and warned that “any instances 
of maladministration of the tests are completely unacceptable”, we asked 
Lewisham how it was responding. It had told us in February that the school 
continued to provide a very high standard of education to its pupils and that 
it was conducting its own investigation “to assure ourselves that proper 
procedures are in place”.

In recent weeks, we have been asking the authority for an update, but had not 
had a response until this column’s deadline, when Lewisham said: “It is an 
extremely serious matter and the review’s findings, which are due very soon, 
will be carefully scrutinised … and appropriate action taken.”

Academy plan scrapped


Finally, also in Lewisham, a question mark hangs over the future of one 
outstanding school after a parent forced its governors to scrap – temporarily, 
at least – plans to turn it into an academy.

The Department for Education had to rescind an academy order for Prendergast 
school after the parent threatened a judicial review on the grounds that a 
staff governor had not consented to the plan, which is required by law. 
Prendergast is one of three in a federation due to academise despite a fierce 
campaign by parents and pupils, and teacher strikes. The indications are that 
the proposals will continue for the other two schools. TheDfE reportedly 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/government-to-rewrite-academy-rules-after-staff-member-halts-school-conversion/>
 views the setback as a mere technicality that will be put right by the 
forthcoming education bill.

But will the governors really want to press on, given all the controversy? We 
shall see.
