
There I am, bowling along the A417, merry as a grig, on my way to join friends 
near Ludlow for the weekend. Suddenly, at somewhere called Ocle Pychard in 
Herefordshire, I flash past a sign reading "Cider & Perry Tasting". It's about 
time for elevenses, I think, so I turn around and head down a drive leading to 
a neat, red-brick farmhouse with chickens picking their way around the garden 
and a yard with a barn down one side. That's where I find Tom Oliver, champion 
perry and cider maker, and Slow Food hero. Oh, and tour manager for rock 
groups, sound engineer, farmer and, well, a slew of other things besides.

In the flesh, Oliver is an affable fellow with cheery features, receding hair 
and a fine set of sideburns. He stands in what used to be part of an old hop 
kiln which is now lined with bottles of his admirable products, all carefully 
lit. These aren't the rough-and-ready products of a casual hobby. The labels 
have been designed and the bottles chosen as carefully as the liquors inside 
have been blended. And they've been blended very carefully indeed, from 
hand-picked, unsprayed pears with names such as Yellow Huffcap, Blakeney Red 
and Judge Amphlett, and such apples as Improved Redstreak, Slack-Ma-Girdle and 
Sweet Alford.

Oliver isn't a scientific blender, he says. "I just use my nose and palate, 
and I try to end up with something that I know is going to work. I don't try to 
produce something that's going to take someone's head off."

And, sure enough, my head isn't blown off by a glass of his Three Counties 
medium-dry perry, but I am blown away by it, by its quiet, off-dry elegance, 
the suavity of its fruit, as debonair as a Savile Row suit, with a long, long 
finish.

Olivers have been farming the 300 or so acres of Moorhouse Farm for four 
generations. The core of the business are Hereford suckler cattle and Texel 
sheep, but the perry and cider side of things is beginning to make a very 
useful contribution to the farm's finances. "It's ironic," he says. "There used 
to be cider orchards here, but my grandfather took them all out in the 20s 
because he didn't agree with the contract Bulmers offered him. He planted hops 
instead, and they did really well until the end of the 80s. Then it started to 
get difficult to make enough money out of hops, so we got out of hops and I was 
looking around for something else to contribute to the farm. So it was back to 
apples and pears."

Not that he grows all the varieties he uses. "We have access to wonderful 
fruit around here. Some people have the remains of old orchards on their land, 
and they let me have the fruit for free or in exchange for bottles of the end 
product."

He admits he could have chosen an easier drink to make. "Perry can be a bit 
more awkward than cider. Quite often the first barrel people make is fantastic, 
so they think they've cracked it. Then the next year turns out to be rough and 
ropey. And the year after that there's no fruit at all, and people lose heart. 
Cider is relatively straightforward to make."

So is cider made by craftsmen and perry by artists? He laughs long and hard. 
"I'd have to have a great deal more to drink before I'd say that. Anyway, I 
make both."

Not every batch is a drinking masterpiece. I notice some particularly dashing 
bottles with an amber liquid inside them. These are the by-product of some of 
Oliver's less successful batches, which have been turned into Rock 
single-varietal perry vinegar, aged for four years in oak barrels. Nothing gets 
wasted.

Oliver reckons the future is quietly bright for perry and cider makers. "Ten 
years ago there was zero interest. In the past three years, we've really begun 
to see things change. In the long term, I think it'll make a significant 
difference to the economic viability of the farm because it harks back to the 
old way of traditional mixed farming, when everything had its place and season."

Where to get it

Oliver's Perry & Cider House

The Old Hop Klins, Moorhouse Farm, Ocle Pychard, Herefordshire, 07768 732026

theolivers.org.uk <http://theolivers.org.uk/>
