
It was not the best time to start this particular new job. Stephen O’Brien 
took up the reins at the UN agency in charge of organising humanitarian aid on 
1 June 2015, slap-bang in the middle of the worst humanitarian crisis since the 
second world war.

At that point, the news about the refugee crisis was still not getting through 
to most people. UN agencies and NGOs were frantically trying to deal with a 
vast wave of fleeing refugees in the Middle East and sub-Saharan Africa, a 
population movement triggered by conflict combined with other factors including 
climate change, economic need and joblessness. The cost of getting food and 
shelter for the refugees was mounting hourly – the UN’s annual appeal for 
humanitarian funding hit £20bn by the end of 2016 – and the humanitarian system 
was starting to crack under the strain, but somehow the story was not getting 
through to the public. O’Brien’s task, getting media attention, coordinating 
humanitarian manpower and rallying nation states to dig deep into their pockets 
to fund the work, must have seemed insuperable.

It’s hard enough to coordinate humanitarian aid in the middle of a crisis 
without having to reform it at the same time
Mike Noyes, Action Aid 
To add to that, he also had the job of overseeing the UN’s first world 
humanitarian summit, announced by the UN secretary generalBan Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon> a few months earlier. It was 
arranged in response to, “the growing number of people in crisis and the 
dramatic increase in funding requirements” said Ban.


“It’s a pretty impossible job,” says Mike Noyes, humanitarian manager at 
Action Aid. “It’s hard enough to coordinate humanitarian aid in the middle of a 
crisis of this size without having to also reform it at the same time.”

O’Brien had ended up in the “impossible” job after David Cameron’s first 
suggestion (the UK chooses the head of the Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs,Ocha <http://www.unocha.org/>, under an anachronistic 
system left over from the UN’s foundation) of Andrew Lansley was rejected.

In O’Brien’s favour, he had a familiarity with Africa (having been born there) 
and later worked as the UK’s special envoy for the Sahel, and with the subject 
matter (he was at the UK’s department for international development, DfID, for 
several years). He also had a reputation for hard work and serious intentions. 
Insiders at DfID remember his habit on departmental field trips of avoiding the 
media-friendly photoshoots in favour of the less glamorous but more useful 
graft in the back office.

Related: Live Q&A: What impact will the Istanbul summit have on humanitarian 
response? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/16/live-qa-what-impact-will-the-istanbul-summit-have-on-humanitarian-response>

But less favourably looked on was his air of politician from another era; his 
colonial history (Tanganyika Territory 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tanganyika_(territory)>, O’Brien’s 1957 
birthplace, was still under British control at the time) combined with being a 
white, middle-class male with an Oxbridge background (he studied law at 
Cambridge and worked as a solicitor before becoming a Conservative MP) . “Very 
posh,” was the only thing one UN insider would comment recently. “Out of his 
depth,” was another’s assessment, several months into the job.

Across the sector there was an appetite for radical restructuring, with the UN 
seen as an anachronistically centralised system in a world that, as Sean Lowrie 
of the Start network puts it “increasingly needs something different, more 
responsive, more decentralised and agile”.

Concerns that O’Brien would shun radical change in favour of maintaining the 
status quo were only confirmed byan interview 
<http://www.irinnews.org/report/102119/qa-%E2%80%98un-doesn%E2%80%99t-have-change%E2%80%99-says-relief-chief>
 with the humanitarian news site Irin a few months into the job, where he 
appeared to dismiss the need for UN reform. It was not a great start.

‘My role has been challenging’

“There’s no question, I was running full tilt from day one,” says O’Brien now, 
a year into the job. He is speaking to me on the phone from New York, shortly 
before setting off to theWorld Humanitarian Summit (WHS) in Istanbul 
<https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/> on a trip that will include visits 
to Chad and Niger. “I have a strong team that has helped to support what we all 
have to do, but in taking on the reins with Ocha and working with the partners 
around the UN and beyond in my role, that has been challenging.”

The scale of needs is outpacing the ability of the rest of the world in terms 
of actors and money to meet those needs
Stephen O'Brien 
But, he argues, this is a job that “is about seeking to make a big difference 
to people’s lives. All of us are determined that there is no bigger and better 
international good in which we can all be engaged, trying to save lives, 
prevent civilian deaths, to give people hope and enable people to stay in their 
homes and have a future – of course this is work which is deeply motivating.” 
He adds: “If it was an impossible job, I wouldn’t be trying to do it.”

He says now that it was obvious from his first day in office that change would 
be needed. “The scale of needs is outpacing the ability of the rest of the 
world both in terms of actors and money to meet those needs.”

But what of fears in the sector that the humanitarian summit will not deliver 
any UN reform? Médecin Sans Frontières dropped out last week,stating that 
<http://www.msf.org.uk/article/msf-to-pull-out-of-world-humanitarian-summit> 
“we no longer have any hope that the WHS will address the weaknesses in 
humanitarian action and emergency response”.


Noyes admits he is going to Istanbul with low expectations, and says that “the 
summit seems to be saying that the UN is really difficult to change, so let’s 
change the easy bits instead. We’ll just adjust the system to cope with the 
UN’s weaknesses rather than tackling fundamental issues.”

O’Brien appeared to confirm these worries when he told Irin last year that he 
felt that: “no, the UN doesn’t have to change. What has to [be done is] we have 
to build on all this fantastic track record and build on the best, and yes then 
change to add and to bring in more innovation, more skills, more ability to 
generate the high-impact results of life-saving and protection of civilians 
that we know can be achieved and working increasingly with a wider range of 
partners.” He says now that his later comment that the system was “broke, not 
broken” was in relation to finance, rather than to the whole system. “There is 
no option of saying it’s business as usual. We have to change, we have to look 
at reform. Part of the humanitarian summit, which is a comprehensive approach 
to the whole of humanitarian activity, will be commitment to change by those in 
the UN.”

Priorities

As priorities, he mentions preventing conflict, backing up humanitarian law, 
fulfilling the climate change agreement, the sustainable development goal 
pledge to “leave no one behind”, and financing for all of those. He adds: “You 
can only do that with confidence providing that there is genuine reform in the 
UN, that we work better across and with each other in order to deliver most 
effectively and efficiently.”

So what does he think about the feeling that the UN has become too top-down? 
“Over the past three years we have conducted a consultation with 23,000 people, 
152 countries, eight regional consultations, and then a global consultation ... 
If that’s not bottom-up what is?” He goes into detail about the synthesis 
reports and points out that the multi-stakeholder nature of the humanitarian 
summit means that he has had to defend the process to certain unhappy member 
states.

Related: 'International humanitarian law is unravelling before our eyes' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/25/international-humanitarian-law-is-unravelling-before-our-eyes>

O’Brien says he is “optimistic and indeed enthusiastic about all the signs of 
a successful outcome”. He refuses to go into detail, but suggests that there 
will be proposals for a reform of the way departments work within the UN 
brought to the summit. “And then there will be some things that we do need to 
bring the member states together on in some kind of intergovernmental process 
... that might be a commitment to the way we finance ... or how do we make sure 
that there is a sense of real transparency and accountability for conformity 
with international humanitarian law.”

He believes that the summit has had a “really good, catalysing effect for all 
these discussions” (and that impression is certainly echoed by everyone to whom 
I’ve spoken). The former lawyer is passionate about the need to find some way 
to hold governments accountable for breaches of international humanitarian law, 
referring to the recentUN resolution 
<http://www.un.org/press/en/2016/sc12347.doc.htm> condemning attacks against 
medical facilities, and implying that his long-term goal is “a tribunal to 
which [victims and witness of such attacks] can introduce that evidence and 
hold people to account as to how did this decision happen”.

Related: Will a 'grand bargain' solve the humanitarian funding crisis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jan/18/will-a-grand-bargain-solve-the-humanitarian-funding-crisis>

As the conversation winds up, I ask what episode, of all the many visits he 
has paid as head of Ocha, has stuck with him. He thinks for a moment, then 
says: “I talked to a man sitting with his wife and four children in two very 
small rooms on the outskirts of Amman, Jordan.”

The family had been forced to flee their home in Homs. The oldest son was 17 
and attending school in Jordan, but he would soon finish his education and 
wouldn’t be able to work or go on to university. “So his father was worried 
about what would happen, because Isis and others who have malign intentions 
were around the corner waiting, wanting to recruit.”

O’Brien replays the conversation he had with the father: “He told me: ‘I want 
to go home as soon as it is safe to do so, all we want to do is get back home, 
rebuild our home, rebuild our lives, rebuild Syria. But now my son is will soon 
leave school, and I’m going to have to go abroad’ – ie get on a rickety boat. 
He didn’t want to make that choice.

“That conversation reminded me that ... it isn’t about how much we can all 
take in terms of forced displacement, it’s about how much we can invest in the 
hopes and the dreams of people who want to be able to rebuild their lives.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
