
Allowing students to use computers and the internet in classrooms 
substantially harms their results, a study has found.

The paper published by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
<https://seii.mit.edu/research/study/the-impact-of-computer-usage-on-academic-performance-evidence-from-a-randomized-trial-at-the-united-states-military-academy/>
 found that students barred from using laptops or digital devices in lectures 
and seminars did better in their exams than those allowed to use computers and 
access the internet.

The researchers suggested that removing laptops and iPads from classes was the 
equivalent of improving the quality of teaching.

The study divided 726 undergraduates randomly into three groups in the 2014-15 
and 2015-16 academic years. The control group’s classrooms were 
“technology-free,” meaning students were not allowed to use laptops or tablets 
at their desk. Another group was allowed to use computers and other devices, 
and the third group had restricted access to tablets.

“The results from our randomised experiment suggest that computer devices have 
a substantial negative effect on academic performance,” the researchers 
concluded, suggesting that the distraction of an electronic device complete 
with internet access outweighed their use for note-taking or research during 
lessons.

The research had an unusual twist: the students involved were studying at the 
West Point academy in the US, where cadets are ruthlessly ranked by exam 
results, meaning they were motivated to perform well and may have been more 
disciplined than typical undergraduates.

But even for the cream of the US army’s future crop, the lure of the digital 
world appears to have been too much, and exam performance after a full course 
of studying economics was lower among those in classes allowed to use devices.

Related: Mobile phone bans improve school exam results, research shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/15/mobile-phone-bans-improve-school-exam-results-research-shows>

“Our results indicate that students perform worse when personal computing 
technology is available. It is quite possible that these harmful effects could 
be magnified in settings outside of West Point,” the researchers concluded.

“In a learning environment with lower incentives for performance, fewer 
disciplinary restrictions on distracting behaviour, and larger class sizes, the 
effects of internet-enabled technology on achievement may be larger due to 
professors’ decreased ability to monitor and correct irrelevant usage.”

Tom Bennett, founder of the ResearchED education group 
<http://www.workingoutwhatworks.com/>, who is leading a UK 
government-commissionedreview of smartphone use 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/13/mobile-phone-impact-school-lessons-scrutiny>
 in classrooms, noted the research found that even the brightest students 
appeared to be distracted by the presence of digital devices, in contrast to 
previous studies.

“Of course, nothing about this is conclusive and it needs to be read in the 
context of the undergraduate experience, but there are some interesting 
reflective points for all educators. Do you need to use tablets? How do you 
compensate for the possibility of distraction?” Bennett said.

Research published last year by the London School of Economics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/15/mobile-phone-bans-improve-school-exam-results-research-shows>
 found that banning mobile phones affected school pupils according to their 
ability. “Banning mobile phones improves outcomes for the low-achieving 
students … and has no significant impact on high-achievers,” it concluded.

The new research is distinctive because it analysed the results of students in 
classroom conditions rather than as part of an artificial experiment.

“In contrast to the laboratory-style research, our study measures the 
cumulative effects of internet-enabled classroom technology over the course of 
a semester, as opposed to its impact on immediate or short-term recall of 
knowledge,” the researchers said.

“We want to be clear that we cannot relate our results to a class where the 
laptop or tablet is used deliberately in classroom instruction, as these 
exercises may boost a student’s ability to retain the material,” they added.
