
OK, now that I am definitely pregnant, I have had time to decide what I'm 
going to do differently from last time. I am not going to just sit like a 
marshmallow complaining that I have indigestion; I'm going to carry a little 
notebook all the time to write down my No/Yes foods. In the other hand, I am 
going to carry a pack of Bisodol. Maybe I will get these items made into 
earrings for my third pregnancy. Just kidding! I'm environmentally opposed to 
having three children, and also C would leave me.

C, incidentally, has gone to a conference. When he's here, I spend my entire 
time bitching and moaning about how I do everything - occasionally, I might 
give feminist texture to this by interweaving some mis-interpretations of the 
Cinderella complex, but, essentially, it is just bitching and moaning. Then he 
goes away for four days, and I am cream-crackered; I am insane with tiredness. 
I still don't know what it is he does around here, but it must be a lot. I can 
admit that today, while he is still away.

Back to my No/Yes list, which at the moment says: No - onions, garlic, 
potatoes, parsley, smoked salmon, smoked mackerel, all smoked fish, oh, all 
fish, sausages, all other pork products apart from pâté, oh no, pâté as well, 
all meat, all root vegetables, all other vegetables, citrus fruit, summer 
berries, all other fruit.

Yes - bagels, chocolate, cake. 

If you are prone to gestational indigestion (indigestation, if you will), you 
can have my list free as it is probably true for you also.

When I am back to normal and this accursed recession is over, I'm going to 
launch my own brand of indigestion tablets. They will have the same active 
ingredients as Rennie, but they'll have a picture of a pregnant woman or, 
better, a really happy baby on the packet, and they'll be called, pff (that is 
an oral shrug), I don't know, some cynical name that manages to play on the 
neurosis of the pregnant woman while appealing to her desperate urge to be able 
to digest her own food. I'll make a killing. They will be the Feminax of the 
heartburn world.

I am categorically not going to buy clothes that aren't maternity, but just 
somewhat bigger than my regular clothes. This is what I did last time after I 
read in some magazine that you didn't really need to be in maternity wear till 
you were six months in. But I clearly needed something I could do up, so I 
found myself in a Gap changing room with a bunch of trousers so large I could 
have used them as parachutes, but not as trousers because I still couldn't do 
them up, crying.

I'm not doing that this time. If things don't do up, I will wear a long vest 
and hope for the best. I read in a different magazine that all clothes are 
going to look rubbish anyway, so you should just wear something neutral and 
probably elasticated, and concentrate on jewellery. This sounds good, doesn't 
it? Unfortunately, the only piece of jewellery I have is a celebration 
gold-and-blue Blue Peter badge, marking its 50th birthday. I applied it 
prominently to my roomy elasticated jacket, thinking that I would beef it up 
later when I found a gold necklace, or a blue nose ring or something. My sister 
said you couldn't really see the Blue Peter emblem under all the celebration 
glister, so it looked like it was my birthday, and I was a quite well-preserved 
50-year-old. I wouldn't have minded if she'd said very well-preserved. It was 
the "quite" that made me take it off.

I am not going to bother, this time, with what people say about how pregnant I 
do or don't look. Last time I was on perpetual alert. When he said "blooming", 
did he really mean "panting and immobilised as if I had pre-eclampsia"? When 
she said, "You don't look six months, more like four and a half", is that 
because a) I am less enormous than I think, b) when you are this enormous, your 
actual bump looks smaller because all these things are relative or c) she is 
just trying to make me feel better? It's a mug's game. You look how you look, 
and nobody's emollient remarks will change that, nor, for that matter, make the 
pregnancy go any faster.

One day I will share my full and unabridged opinion on self-styled "media" 
doctors who try to frighten fat preggers with bandying around of notions such 
as "your weight gain may well end with a stillbirth". In case I never get round 
to it, in precis, it is not a good opinion.
