
Am I a good mother or a bad one and how would I know? As I kiss Sam, my 
22-year-old, goodbye and watch him walk down the road, rucksack on his back, 
I feel terrible. More terrible than he does I would guess. He has a job 
interview tomorrow morning, which almost qualifies him to move back home. Only
almost because it is his third attempt: the first time he missed the interview, 
the second time they rearranged and here we are three weeks later. I can only 
assume neither party is that interested.

Sam is collecting the trousers from the suit we bought him for our wedding, 
but not the jacket as there isn't room in his rucksack. Instead, he finds room 
for a packet of cooked chicken drumsticks, an apple and two KitKats. He is 
staying at a friend's house and doesn't like to eat their food.

Although he has officially left home until he finds something to do that isn't 
playing online poker, he does pop home occasionally to stay the night. The 
rules we have set are sufficiently vague that none of us can remember exactly 
what they are.

"I miss Sam," says Lydia, who is nine. 

"Well, we'll see him soon because he has left all his clothes here and he 
doesn't have any money," I reassure her.

But I am always a moment away from calling him back. It's only because the 
thought of him lying in bed all day at 30, with his clothes strewn over the 
landing and his room full of unwashed dishes, scares me that I am trying a 
tough-love approach.

The next day I take Tilly and Lydia into town. We get a parking space that's 
free because it's a Sunday, and bundle Flora into her buggy.

"Excuse me, do you have any change?" says a polite voice from behind some 
cardboard in a doorway. The voice belongs to a man in his late 20s who doesn't 
look as if he has been sleeping rough for long. I give him money but then 
remember someone saying you should give food instead of money.

We are outside Costa so I ask if he wants some food and he says yes, thanks. I 
forget to ask what he wants to eat but Lydia asks him what he wants to drink. 
"Tea with 10 sugars," he says.

"Why are we getting him something to eat?" asks Tilly, not unreasonably 
because we don't normally do this.

"Because I feel bad for him and he has a nice voice," I say. But I'm probably 
doing it because I can't fix things with Sam and this is an easy thing to do. 
Lydia bustles outside and hands over what we've bought.

I apologise for not having asked if he eats meat (because there is some in his 
sandwich) but the homeless man with a nice voice just smiles and thanks us. 
"I'm glad we did that because I feel all good now," says Lydia as we walk 
towards the shops. "That's not why we did it," I tell her, although in my case 
it may well be.

By the time we get home it's late, I haven't put any supper on, it's school 
tomorrow, and in a moment of weakness J agrees to get McDonald's. Even baby 
Flora, untainted by junk food, tries a little bit of Filet-o-Fish.

We get everyone bathed and in bed, but the girls refuse to settle. They are 
still chatting after I have gone to bed and am lying awake worrying about 
whether Sam (whose mobile is not working again) is OK. I realise the girls 
can't sleep because the McDonald's came with large colas. While neither this 
nor Sam staying at his friend's necessarily mean I'm a bad mother, it's only 
Tilly calling out "I love you Mummy" that helps me go to sleep.

Ps: Next week will be my last column because Flora is one year old and that is 
long enough.
