
The editor of a US tabloid has pledged to continue exposing celebrities who 
have used legal gagging orders to prevent British newspapers from reporting on 
their private lives.

This pledge has been reported by the Daily Telegraph and, in slightly 
different form, by the Daily Mail, and both report thatthe secrets of 15 
celebrities could be exposed. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/04/15-celebrities-whose-secrets-could-be-exposed-by-injunction-ruli/>

According to the Telegraph, “even the name of the US tabloid, and of its 
editor, cannot be published in England and Wales” because it might lead readers 
to the coverage and therefore breach the injunctions.

The American publication has so far named two people covered by injunctions: a 
celebrity known as PJS who was allegedly involved in an extra-marital 
threesome; and an actor accused of paying for sex with an escort.

The woman has been widely named as Helen Wood. She is reported, by the Daily 
Star 
<http://www.dailystar.co.uk/showbiz/512804/Helen-Wood-married-A-list-actor-injunction-named>
, as being “mortified” by the story resurfacing some five years after the actor 
obtained the injunction.

Others could well be mortified in coming months because the Telegraph quoted 
the editor as saying that his magazine “will continue to pursue stories in 
Britain” because “we believe our readers have the right to know about the 
professional and personal lives of these types of celebrities...

“The notion that a celebrity can seek an injunction to prohibit material from 
being published in traditional media when it is available in new media is 
ridiculous.”

On the basis of the editor’s statements, the Mail reported that “a string of 
celebrities hiding sordid secrets”face being unmasked in the coming months. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3574818/Other-celebrities-won-gagging-orders-UK-courts-exposed-magazine-published-details-actor-paid-195-sex-Wayne-Rooney-prostitute.html>

Outside the jurisdiction of the English courts, it appears that the 
injunctions cannot bite. Media lawyer Mark Stephens, of solicitors Howard 
Kennedy, is quoted as saying: “What the Americans have done, for better or 
worse, is democratised knowledge.


‘Anyone [who has] a global reputation - as does this actor, the sports stars 
or any of the others - is going to have to learn to deal with the fact that 
different parts of the world put different emphases on the rights of free 
expression versus privacy.”

The Mail also quoted Bob Satchwell, executive director of the Society of 
Editors: “Injunctions are a 19th century remedy which just don’t work in the 
21st century. The more they happen, the more they bring our courts into 
disrepute because they are simply granting orders which they cannot enforce.”
