
It's the start of the school holidays and I thought I'd wake up feeling 
fabulously happy. I'm still on maternity leave and, for the first time ever, 
have the summer holiday off. No juggling childcare and – for this limited 
period only – no guilt. Yippee. Except that I don't feel deliriously happy. I 
feel sad in the pit of my stomach. I do a mental once over the children, to see 
if it's anything to do with them. A friend of mine has a saying I often quote: 
"You're only ever as happy as your least happy child."

So who is my least happy child and how unhappy are they? Baby Flora seems 
happy enough. Before she was born, I worried that people would think I was her 
granny. The only case of mistaken identity so far seems to be that everyone 
thinks Flora is a boy. Even in her pink swimming costume people ask, "How old 
is he?"

"He's nearly six months," I say, because people get too embarrassed if 
I correct them. Her sisters are outraged. "No wonder some baby girls have their 
ears pierced," Lydia, who's eight, tells me. "Maybe we could put a bow in her 
hair."

But Flora doesn't seem upset. She's growing chubby, sausage-like thighs and 
smiles like a Disney baby, albeit a boy one. The only time she looks unhappy is 
when she has nothing in her mouth.

Could it be Lydia? Yesterday, I dropped her off at a summer camp. When she 
signed up eight months ago, it seemed like a good idea to her, especially as it 
meant she needed a mobile phone to keep in touch. However, on the morning she 
is going, her phone doesn't work. She's locked herself out of it because, guess 
what, at eight you aren't really old enough to have a mobile phone. She has to 
borrow her granny's mobile phone, which is nearly as old as granny.

"I can't take this," she says. "Other children will have BlackBerrys."

Then she's overtired because school has only just finished.

"Just try it," I say. "If you don't like it I can always come and get you."

Which are exactly the words the camp brochure says you shouldn't use.

But she is only eight (nine in a week's time) and six nights is a long time. 
Was I mad? What was I thinking of? Lydia falls asleep in the car and when we 
arrive we find our destination is an incredibly grand public school.She perks 
up immediately. "I feel like royalty," she says.

That evening, she phones to say she has made three friends and spent a third 
of her week's money in the tuck shop, so can I send some more. "I forgot to 
pack soap and shampoo," I tell her.

"That's OK, I don't need to wash," she replies.

"I have to go and watch a film with my friends now," she says, hanging up. I 
miss her so much that I watch a DVD of one of her school productions.

I don't think my eldest children, Sam and Maddy, are unhappy. Sam doesn't have 
a job, but that only makes his family miserable, and Maddy is home from 
university and meeting friends all the time.

Tilly, bang in the middle of all of them, could be my unhappy child, as having 
just finished her last year at primary school, she already misses her friends.

"How do you feel? " I ask her, hugging her so tightly that she wriggles to get 
free.

"Sad," she says. "I don't like change."

Which is probably the cause of my sadness too, I realise. "I want you to have 
a wonderful summer," I say.

"Well then, can you find my Nintendo charger for me?" she asks.
