
What does my throne say about me?

Victoria, a 36-year-old actor, made her “iron throne” from recycled materials 
two years ago, and has 28 signatures on it fromGame of Thrones cast members, 
includingKit Harington. “It says I’m obsessed with Game of Thrones, and that I 
have determination. I made it through trial and error – and boredom.”

And what it really says

I don’t watch Game of Thrones, but even a non-believer like me can see that 
this homemade throne – Victoria’s version of the actual Iron Throne – is an 
amazing achievement. A mad thing to have looming from the corner of your 
sitting room, but amazing, nonetheless. Anything crafted with care and love, 
invention and attention is to be admired, and I admire it.

I’m not sure how well it works as a sofa, though. It’s a bit upright. Not 
enough cushions. Nowhere convenient for snacks. I showed it to a couple of 
people who thought it would work as a commode, meaning you could plonk yourself 
in front of re-runs ofGoT and never have to move. One of the swords would make 
an ideal toilet roll holder.

Game of Thrones is filmed in Belfast and when our real Queen visited the set, 
she refused to sit on the Iron Throne. The rules of monarchy mean royalty can’t 
take their seat upon a throne – even a pretend one – unless it’s theirs. Which 
is the whole point of the programme. The throne is what everyone is fighting 
over: a physical representation of the power at stake.

What this throne says about Victoria is that she takes her fantasy seriously. 
Dungeons & Dragons enthusiasts were once thought of as odd-bods who disappeared 
into magical tales because they couldn’t cope with real life. But with the 
success ofGame of Thrones, they are part of the mainstream alongside Twilight 
vampire-lovers andHarry Potter spell-casters. Victoria isn’t an outsider any 
more. Her throne doesn’t invite ridicule, but applause.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
