
The latest report by the parliamentary and health service ombudsman into 
unsafe discharges from hospital 
<http://www.ombudsman.org.uk/reports-and-consultations/reports/health/a-report-of-investigations-into-unsafe-discharge-from-hospital>
 presents a depressingly familiar tale. In 2014-15 the ombudsman saw complaints 
about discharge rise by more than a third, and upheld (or partly upheld) more 
than half of the 221 complaints it investigated (considerably higher than the 
average rate of 37% for all complaints). The report highlights nine “of our 
most serious cases” to illustrate the issues; these are not claimed to be 
representative, but are held to be indicative “that this is an area that needs 
attention”.

Four serious issues are identified: patients being discharged before they are 
clinically ready to leave hospital; patients not being assessed or consulted 
properly before discharge; relatives and carers not being told that their loved 
one has been discharged; and patients being discharged with no homecare plan in 
place, or being kept in hospital due to poor coordination of services.

The report observes that “best practice guidance has been consistent over the 
last decade”, seeing discharge as a process, not an isolated event. In 2015Nice 
issued guidelines <https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng27> once more 
recommending that a single named health or social care professional should be 
identified as the discharge coordinator.

None of this is new; none of it is rocket science. Hospital discharge has been 
problematic and repeatedly identified in reports, reviews and guidance for more 
than 30 years. What is evident is that the state of discharge arrangements, and 
the quality of patients’ experience of discharge, is a critical marker for the 
quality of partnership working between health and social care. Repeated efforts 
to ensure smooth transition have continued to flounder on structural and 
organisational fragmentation, with sometimes catastrophic consequences for 
patients and their families.

Hasty and poorly organised discharges are the result of rushed efforts to 
clear beds and ensure acute hospitals can continue to function. Without 
capacity, patients (emergency and elective) cannot be admitted, and the 
implications of this resonate throughout the health system and back to urgent 
and emergency care, compromising the delivery of the politically sensitive 
four-hour target 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/oct/26/should-nhs-scrap-ae-four-hour-wait-target>
 wait in A&E.

The experience of major incidents being declared by hospitals unable to manage 
A&E demand throughout the winter (despite it being exceptionally mild) 
underlines once again the complexity of the hospital admission and discharge 
relationship, and capacity issues across the entire health and social care 
system.

Related: NHS and social care must not play the blame game on delayed discharges
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/feb/01/nhs-social-care-delayed-discharge-hospitals>

In 2002 a major shift in the approach to tackling hospital discharges was 
introduced with legislation to impose financial penalties for delays (described 
by ministers as “stronger incentives in the system”). Although much criticised 
at the time, not least by the health select committee, which regarded it as a 
“crude solution” to delayed discharges that risked penalising social services 
authorities for wider structural failings.

Adjustments softened the idea of penalties but created new statutory duties 
around notifications of discharges, and encouraged the development of genuinely 
joint solutions. Thisshould have embedded good practice as the new normal, but 
any return to old-style adversarial modes of operation would be likely to see a 
return of familiar difficulties, and so it has proved to be.

Furthermore, evidence has increased that points to delayed discharges being 
reduced at the cost of higher readmission rates, increased patient 
dissatisfaction, and a rise in admissions for older patients directly from 
hospitals to care homes, thereby reducing their chances of any return to 
independence.

The ombudsman’s report acknowledges that there is no absence of guidance nor 
of apparent consensus on what constitutes good practice. What is lacking is 
“system-wide leadership and shared ownership across health and social care 
services”.

The nine cases featured in the report make for miserable reading, as they 
detail the avoidable distress, suffering and even death for the people 
involved. The ombudsman recommends three areas needing particular attention: 
checking people’s mental capacity and offering legal protection for those 
lacking capacity to ensure their dignity and liberty are safeguarded; treating 
carers and relatives as partners in the discharge planning process, rather than 
as an “afterthought”; and improving coordination within and between services.

How are these changes to be achieved? Certainly there is no lack of 
information and knowledge about the nature of the problems. The ombudsman’s 
report comes on the heels of a2015 inquiry from Healthwatch England 
<http://www.healthwatch.co.uk/safely-home> that focused on people’s experiences 
when leaving hospital and other care settings, and once again documented delays 
and a lack of coordination between agencies.

Healthwatch expressed the hope that “the power of people’s stories will bring 
a new imperative for change and drive health and social care agencies 
nationally and locally to ensure they get discharge right”.

But this rational-optimistic view of policy and practice is unlikely to be 
sufficient to bring about change. If it were that simple, problematic discharge 
would not have been such an enduring challenge. The Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> has established a national 
programme board to “develop a vision for improving discharge”.

However, it is not so much “vision” about the way forward that is the problem, 
but achieving the reality. After decades of the same issues recurring around 
the point of discharge, there is enough understanding both about the causes and 
consequences of delays, and of premature and inappropriate discharges.

For years we have explored and investigated the problems, and experimented 
with solutions and innovation to relatively little effect. It is surely time 
for something more radical. Bringing about the necessary transformational 
change will demand more than vision. Further guidance, more leadership and 
greater clarity about responsibilities may all play a part, but the current 
situation also points to a wider malaise reflecting fundamental resource 
pressures on all parts of the system.

Hospital discharge is the canary in the health and social care coalmine. 
Addressing operational and practice issues while failing to tackle the 
underlying organisational and structural causes of fragmentation and discord – 
of which problematic discharge is primarily an indicator – will ensure the 
recurrence of these apparently insoluble and unacceptable practices.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
