
The dilemma I am in my mid-50s and have never had the chance to experience 
anal sex. My wife is a dear, loving woman and our sex life is otherwise 
fantastic. In the days when we both used to drink more she was willing to give 
it a try, but we were both novices and she couldn’t relax enough in the places 
that mattered to get things going. My wife no longer drinks and whenever I hint 
that we might further explore the possibilities I get a loving kiss and a 
redirection. Would I be terribly in the naughty corner if I strayed on to a 
website that casually caters for such desires for those that seek them? I’m 
sure it would be a one-off. Probably. I guess it’s one of those sexual bucket 
list things.

Mariella replies Sexual bucket list? I’m just loving the 21st century and this 
whole wish fulfilment epidemic. We’ve got children dying of hunger and 
treatable diseases, mothers not surviving childbirth, gay men being pushed off 
buildings in IS-held territory, desperate escapees of war and poverty drowning 
daily in the Mediterranean sea and a seriously deranged, racist golfer on the 
fast track to the White House – and you’re feeling cheated because you haven’t 
yet had anal sex?

Invest in a surprise sexy weekend. Setting the scene, I’ve been discovering in 
my erotic reading, is half the battle

One man’s frustration is another’s crisis, though, and I would hate my 
correspondents to feel that only big philosophical questions about the meaning 
of life or how to achieve world peace were entertained on this page. 
Nevertheless, now and again it’s impossible not to feel assaulted by the many 
minuscule irritations given the oxygen to exceed their status in our 
over-privileged developed world. I appreciate that as an agony aunt I need to 
be open to dilemmas big and small, but I’m really not sure if I can stretch my 
focus this far from real pain.

It can’t be coincidence that I get so many letters from those in the early and 
later chapters of adult life. Teenagers are fabulously fertile fodder for 
matters of love, agonising as they do over unworthy partners and hopeless 
relationships. Then there are midlifers for whom small matters assume huge 
proportions with the return of “me time” after decades of simply getting on 
with the business of living. As the end draws nearer than the beginning there’s 
a tendency to ponder ambitions we’ve failed to realise, experiences we haven’t 
had, and to begin mourning such gaps. The double whammy of more free time and 
less activity returns us to the myopic self scrutiny and frustration we last 
indulged in our adolescence.

Having spent the past few weeks deeply immersed in a tide of erotica as I 
compile an anthology for broader delectation I can honestly say I’ve had my 
fill of buggery. Judging by my pile of literary porn I’d put it in pole 
position in a list of male fantasies, which should provide comfort that there 
are other members of your sex out there in mourning, too. That’s not to say 
there aren’t also plenty of female fans of sodomy, but on the basis of my 
privately conducted poll among friends, family and anyone else I dared ask 
without fear of a slap, it seemed to have less visceral appeal. It’s 
disingenuous to dismiss your wife’s waning interest as simply the result of 
sobriety, not least because it suggests neither of you would have contemplated 
it unless you weren’t in control of your senses. In which case perhaps it 
wasn’t such a great idea to start with.

I can’t help thinking your wife’s lack of enthusiasm has more to do with the 
status quo in your current sexual relationship. If it looms so large on your 
bucket list perhaps you need to return to the ancient art of seduction, rather 
than stubborn persistence. Invest further in its pursuit with a surprise sexy 
weekend somewhere that feels a bit racy instead of yet another Friday night in 
your own bed. Setting the scene, as I’ve been discovering in my erotic reading, 
is definitely half the battle. Or could it be that you’ve simply latched on to 
this minor misdemeanour of your wife’s in order to give you licence to seek 
pleasure elsewhere? I’m not about to green-light your pursuing a single act of 
sexual fulfilment that would put your long-term relationship in potential 
jeopardy.

If your wife remains unwilling despite honed and escalated attempts to seduce 
her, then only you can decide whether the pursuit of fleeting carnal 
satisfaction with a willing stranger will be worth the cost to your 
relationship. Meanwhile may I suggest you turn, not to the ceaseless pounding 
of pert buttocks to be found in all-too-literal fashion on the darker web, but 
to the fantastically rich imaginative sex to be found on the page? Gorge 
yourself as I have on every sexual act known to us as a flight of fiction and 
you may find it less of a priority to perform. Exciting, fulfilling, memorable 
sex often has far more to do with the imaginative journey than the menu we 
choose from.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
