
I grew up in Salt Lake City, Utah. One night when I was barely 16, I was at 
the rollerskating <mailto:experience@theguardian.com> rink when I spotted this 
shy country music boy standing on his own. I was an outgoing punk girl and 
asked him to skate. By the end of the night, we were out the back, making out.

Scott was 18, and within a couple of months we’d moved into an apartment with 
a friend of mine from school, Jennifer, and her boyfriend. It was a dump and 
our only income was from Scott’s carpet-cleaning job, but it felt great being 
in love. We didn’t think much about birth control, and soon enough I thought 
I might be pregnant. We were excited and talked about marriage. But the other 
two fought all the time, so I decided to move back home. One day I went to the 
apartment and nobody answered the door. It wasn’t locked, so I walked in and 
found it empty. I was so confused.

I tried to find out what was going on, but couldn’t trace anyone. Eventually, 
Jennifer called my mum’s house; she said she and her boyfriend didn’t have any 
money, so had gone their separate ways. Then she added that Scott had told her 
he didn’t want anything to do with me or the baby, that he’d moved to another 
town and never wanted to see me again. I was crushed. I thought he loved me. 
How could his feelings change so quickly?

I searched for him but no one could help. I knew he didn’t know how to contact 
me, either. It sounds crazy to say that now, but this was the early 1980s; 
there were no mobile phones or internet, and we didn’t know each other’s 
families.

I was scared, but chose to have the baby. My daughter, Holly, and I lived with 
my mum while I finished high school and went to college. As Holly grew up, even 
when I was struggling, I didn’t resent Scott: it was my choice to have her and 
give her the best life I could, and I knew I was good at that. I made sure she 
had no animosity towards her father. I had other relationships, and two other 
children, but never met anyone I wanted to be with for ever. I figured I’d 
never get married and was happy with that.

Then, six years ago, when Holly was 27 and her own son was born, she decided 
she wanted to find Scott. I’d made previous attempts to look for him that never 
came to anything, but now tracing people had become so much easier. We found 
Scott on Facebook. I messaged him saying Holly wanted to meet him. I didn’t 
expect a response, but a few days later he replied with a friendly message, 
saying he wanted to meet her, too. I was so relieved, but also nervous about 
talking to him. When we spoke on the phone, he sounded exactly the same. We 
talked for four hours; sometimes you don’t even know you’ve missed someone. He 
said he’d been married three times, had four children and was now single.

He came up from Colorado to see us. He walked into the house and I was sitting 
there with our grandson. He said, “You look exactly the same.” We hugged and I 
said, “You smell exactly the same”, which made everyone laugh. He asked me to 
go to a movie the next night. We didn’t call it a date, but he came back to 
mine and we kissed. That connection was still there.

When Scott and I talked things over, it all made sense. Jennifer had told him 
the same story: that I never wanted to see him again, never loved him and had 
used him to get pregnant. We don’t know why she did it; she obviously wasn’t in 
a good place herself. I have never felt anger towards Scott – we’ve both had 
things going on in the years in between. He was homeless after leaving the 
apartment, and battled with drug addiction, but turned his life around. The 
thing is, Scott and I have the rest of our lives together now; I’m nearly 50 
and he’s 52. We have a daughter and adorable grandkids. Holly gets a kick out 
of it, because she can finally say, “Here are my parents.” When we got married 
three years ago, it felt like we’d already done it.

Related: Experience: I lost my dog for nine months 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/13/experience-i-lost-my-dog-for-nine-months>

I still listen to punk; he still listens to country. Our old apartment is a 
parking lot. Sometimes we drive past and it makes us grateful for what we have. 
Maybe if we’d stayed together, it wouldn’t have turned out this way.

• As told to Candice Pires.

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
