
Thomas on April



What were you hoping for?
At least another Instagram follower, but hopefully a whirlwind romance.

First impressions?
Pretty, and her Dublin accent made me swoon.

What did you talk about?
As a northerner, I tried to convince her that she must visit Liverpool and 
Glasgow.

Any awkward moments?
I think I called her Avril at one point, which is odd as I don’t know any 
Avrils.

Good table manners?
Impeccable.

Best thing about April?
Her nature. She was an excellent conversationalist and you can just tell she 
is well-liked by everyone.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Most yeah, not all. She’s too nice for some.

Describe April in three words 
Confident, attractive, chic.

What do you think she made of you?
I hope I came across as a gentleman, but we had been drinking.

Did you go on somewhere?
Nope, she made a hasty exit so I went to meet friends for a debrief.

And… did you kiss?
I don’t think she was ever going to let me kiss her, which is a shame as I’m 
a damn fine kisser.

Marks out of 10?
7.

Would you meet again?
I did ask if she’d like to meet again, but I think we both knew it wasn’t 
going to happen.

April on Thomas

What were you hoping for?
If nothing else, a funny story to tell my friends.

First impressions?
He’s shorter than me, friendly and wearing a nice shirt.

What did you talk about?
Where we went to uni, films, work, Glastonbury, box sets.

Any awkward moments?
He described himself as really old at 30. I’m 31.

Good table manners?
He thought his dessert was better than mine and kept telling me he’d won 
at dessert.

Best thing about Tom?
He seemed interested in everything I said.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
I don’t see why not.

Describe Tom in three words 
Nice, friendly, chatty.

What do you think he made of you?
I think he was happy he got someone normal.

Did you go on somewhere?
No. He’d asked me out for a second date and I said no.

And… did you kiss?
Absolutely not.

Marks out of 10?
6.

Would you meet again?
I don’t think so. There was no connection there for me.

• April and Thomas ate at Momo, Heddon Street, Regent Street’s Food Quarter, 
London W1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial, go to 
soulmates.theguardian.com <http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
