
At tea-time I swear I was a good mother. I was smiling, arms round each of my 
middle girls, strolling through the park on an unusually sunny October day. 
"Love you, Mummy," they chorused. "Love you, darlings," I replied. Tilly, who's 
11, was pushing Flora in her buggy. It was all just lovely. But by 8pm I'm 
arguing with both of them, having already spent half an hour shouting at my 
22-year-old son, who stormed out of the house to get the night bus to 
Liverpool. There, he says, he will make a fortune from making a music album 
with friends. And you, he tells me, will get none of the money.

Poor baby Flora is tucked under one of my arms, clearly alarmed at the raised 
voices. I feel as though I am sullying her babyhood with my yelling. Too late I 
realise that it's all about escalation. No one, especially me, at any time in 
this shout fest of an evening has paused to calm things down.

With the girls, it starts, as it often does, with a simple question.

"Have you done your homework?"

There's no reply. It's only after my third time of asking that I notice the 
girls are sitting on the sofa transfixed by Mamma Mia! One would never guess 
they'd seen it 20 times before. "You need to turn this off and do your 
homework," I say, voice rising.

I know there is no relationship between volume and outcome. I'm more likely to 
get them to do their homework by using a quiet, firm voice, as opposed to a 
loud, whiny one. But the last few nights I have been up a lot with baby Flora, 
as she drools and whines, waiting for her two front teeth to appear. So it's 
the loud, whiny voice that comes out. I need them to just do what I ask them. 
Now. Is that so unreasonable?

"I just want to hear my favourite song first," says Lydia.

"OK," I say. Because that sounds quite reasonable. But I stop paying 
attention, and before I know it half an hour and at least four songs have gone 
by. I feel disproportionately outraged.

"That's it," I say, "I'm turning it off, and there's a television ban. You 
can't watch television on school nights."

They are immediately outraged, which surprises me as I've imposed this 
punishment on them before and forgotten to deliver on it. If I was them I'd go 
"OK" and wait for me to forget. But they start shouting "It's not fair!" as 
though watching television is a fundamental human right.

"If you carry on I'll go up to the school and tell your teachers I have to nag 
you and nag you to do your homework." I am now officially a ranting, mad woman. 
As if teachers don't already know we nag our children to do their homework.

Then I do something that further escalates this miserable evening. I look at 
one of their school books and make some critical comments about their work. "I 
hate you, you are a witch, no one in this house likes you and you should get 
out of this room," one of the girls screams at me.

I wonder if I should ring my eldest daughter at university and see if she 
wants to fight with me too. And I remember the time I shouted at my mum in the 
sweet shop: "I hate you, I wish you were dead." Well, what goes around, comes 
around.

By the time they go to bed (homework mostly done) things are calmer. I go in 
to say goodnight about six times, called back on pretexts that I wouldn't 
usually be suckered into responding to. I feel bad, and so do they. It strikes 
me that while escalating is incredibly quick, de-escalating takes a whole lot 
longer.
