
An airport built on a remote South Atlantic island by the British government – 
at the cost £285m of public money – cannot be used because planes landing there 
are blown off course, Whitehall’s spending watchdog has found.


The development on St Helena was approved in 2010  
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jul/22/aid-tory-donor-lord-ashcroft-labour>
by the then development secretary Andrew Mitchell and was one of the biggest 
single government investments ever made in a UK overseas territory.


The cliff-top landing strip was due to be opened last month as part of a plan 
to end the island’s dependency on UK government subsidies.

A report by the National Audit Office has found that safety concerns relating 
to windshear and turbulence have led to the mothballing of the airport. 
Windshear is a sudden powerful change in wind direction that can destabilise 
large aircraft and has been responsible for crashes around the world.

Related: Aid money used as 'payback' for Tory donor Lord Ashcroft, Labour 
claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jul/22/aid-tory-donor-lord-ashcroft-labour>

The NAO said the Department for International Development (DfID) had 
subsidised St Helena with £28m in 2015-16 and was expected to hand it a total 
of £667m by 2043, when subsidies are due to end.


However, the airport delay could add to those costs, the report released on 
Thursday concludes. Auditors are concerned that without an airport the island 
will not be able to attract enough tourists to make it self-sufficient.

Responding to the report, Diane Abbott, the shadow international development 
secretary, said: “It is extremely concerning that such a huge investment has 
been mismanaged by this government … ministers must urgently clarify the 
additional impact of the delay on St Helena.”

Tim Farron, leader of the Lib Dems, questioned why the government had failed 
to commission studies on windshear before the money was spent. “This is a 
serious misuse of the aid budget which is meant to be helping the poorest in 
the world, and will present an open goal to those who looking for cynical 
opportunities to criticise international aid,” he said.

Amyas Morse, head of the National Audit Office, said the financial stability 
of the island would depend on a number of factors including tourist numbers and 
how much they spend. “The airport’s planned opening date in May 2016 has been 
postponed as outstanding safety concerns are addressed, potentially adding to 
the project’s cost and delaying its benefits,” he said.

The island, which is home to around 4,000 people and is located 1,200 miles 
west of Angola, is known for being where Napoleon was exiled in 1815 after his 
defeat at Waterloo. He died there in 1821. It can only be reached by sea and 
has relied upon the ageing Royal Mail ship St Helena which is soon to be 
retired.

The NAO said the overall success of the scheme depended on attracting 
sufficient tourists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jan/08/st-helena-airport-tourist-destination-napoleon-bonaparte>
 to the island as well ensuring that they spent enough once they were there. 
While the island had enough hotel places for the numbers projected to visit 
during the first six years, the island government had admitted that it needed 
to improve the accommodation’s quality.

DfID and St Helena’s government are looking at the options for dealing with 
the problem caused by the wind conditions but have yet to agree on a solution.


The former Tory party treasurer Lord Ashcroft, who was a vocal supporter of 
the airport in 2010, wrote on the ConservativeHome website last week that he 
was forced to abandon a planned visit to the island because of “serious 
concerns that the airport is too dangerous to use”. The Tory-led coalition 
approved the scheme with £250m from the development fund – the largest single 
investment it has made in overseas territories.

A DfID spokesperson said that some planes had been able to land on the island, 
including an airplane which successfully evacuated a sick child to Cape Town on 
Saturday. “As the report points out, the UK supports its overseas territories 
in line with international law,” she said. “We are helping St Helena overcome 
the challenge of being one of the most remote island communities in the world 
so it can develop its tourism industry and become financially self-sufficient, 
making it less dependent on aid.”

 * The headline on this article was corrected on 9 June 2016 to make clear 
that the opening of the airport has been delayed, not scrapped. 