
I remember the first time I witnessed a death. As a student nurse on my first 
acute ward placement, I knew I wouldn’t be able to avoid the experience, yet I 
still felt so unprepared. I stood at the patient’s bedside staring.

As she repeatedly cried out “I want to go home, I want to go home”, I was 
filled with powerlessness. The only reassurance I could provide was that she 
was in a safe place and that I was there for her. Where were her relatives? 
Would I be the last person this patient would see?

I made my excuses to leave, turned a corner into the secretary’s office​ and 
burst into tears

As her breathing became more laboured – a phenomenon known as Cheyne-Stoking 
to the medical world – I held her hand and stood within eyesight, trying to 
provide as much comfort as an unfamiliar face can. First, the cries became 
weaker, and eventually her breathing ceased. The body made a sigh-like sound as 
the last bit of air escaped from the lungs, and then I was alone, my brain 
tricking me into seeing movements that weren’t there.

No training could have readied me for the experience of being with someone at 
the point of death. This first-hand encounter showed me the reality. You feel 
sorrow at an impending death and you mourn the loss of someone you barely knew.

It forces you to question your own mortality. To a layperson, the process of 
dying is an unknown territory, something feared and not understood. To a nurse, 
it is a steep learning curve.

When I qualified, death presented an additional challenge – communicating with 
family members. The first time I had to break the bad news, I did not cope 
well. The passing had been unexpected and again, I felt unprepared. After 
leading a grief-stricken family to their deceased loved one, I made my excuses 
to leave, turned a corner into the secretary’s office and burst into tears. The 
room was occupied, and in an effort to make sense of my thoughts I questioned 
my management of the situation aloud.

Had my emotions weakened my ability to be a nurse? If I couldn’t control my 
own grief, how could I support the family? Memories of bereavement and 
palliative care study days came flooding back. But with limited experience, 
this information meant nothing. Reluctantly, I departed my safe haven to 
confront my fears again. I bumbled my way through the morning, darting in and 
out of the relatives’ room attempting to answer questions and trying – 
unsuccessfully – to provide consolation.

Nothing I said could erase the family’s pain – everything sounded so 
rehearsed. How could I display the sincerity of my sorrow without letting my 
guard down?

As I led the family out of the ward, I looked the patient’s wife in the eye, 
held her arm, and said: “I am so sorry.” She nodded, eyes brimming with tears, 
and walked down the corridor. I returned to the ward and reflected. Would I be 
able to cope with future years of nursing if grieving was my only way of 
dealing with death?

Related: I am dying and I want everyone to talk about it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/12/i-am-dying-want-talk-family-carer-doctors-death>

Further on in my career, I still don’t know the answer and I’m not sure I ever 
will. But I have learned that it is acceptable to grieve as it clears a path to 
empathy. The process of experiencing anguish from the perspective of a patient 
or relative means that sentiments can remain situational, something that can be 
left behind at the end of a shift. Dissociation is central to survival as a 
nurse – but it does not come naturally.

With only a few years of post-qualification experience behind me, I sometimes 
find myself too engaged in a situation to compartmentalise my emotions. It is 
then that I have to pause and remind myself that although I am a nurse, I am 
still a human.


Florence Bull blogs about her experience of being a nurse here 
<http://flomaryrose.wordpress.com>.

If you would like to write a piece for Blood, sweat and tears, read our 
guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
