
Richard on Charlie

What were you hoping for? 
Stimulating, fun conversation, with few clumsy moments from myself.


First impressions?
I’m attracted to bold, striking eyes, and Charlie has a great pair (of eyes).

What did you talk about?
Fashion, family, food, travel, exes, music and Scrabble.

Any awkward moments?
Plenty. I asked Charlie if I could go to the toilet.

Good table manners?
Impeccable.

Best thing about Charlie?
She’s open-minded and a great listener.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Yes.

Describe her in three words
Funny, awkward, attractive.

What do you think she made of you?
That I was pretty easy-going and easy on the eye.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, it was quite late by the time we left the restaurant and Charlie had to 
prepare for a wedding she was travelling to the next day.

And… did you kiss?
No comment.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I wouldn’t have arrived 15 minutes early. That got me nervous.

Marks out of 10?
9.

Would you meet again?
Yes.

Charlie on Richard

What were you hoping for?
A gentleman that found an awkward girl endearing.


First impressions?
Friendly, smiley, as nervous as me (I pretended not to notice).

What did you talk about?
Heavy on the food chat, then a bit of family, friends and jobs.

Any awkward moments?
Consistently. We’re awkward people, so it was inevitable.

Good table manners?
He ate ribs with cutlery, impressively.

Best thing about Richard?
He is a Scrabble fan and wrote me a poem.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Absolutely.

Describe him in three words
Funny, interesting, charming.

What do you think he made of you?
Erm, nervous wreck?

Related: Blind date: ‘We talked about the zombie apocalypse' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/07/blind-date-lizzie-angela> 

Did you go on somewhere?
We stayed there till closing as they kept offering us booze.

And… did you kiss?
A small peck!

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
That I hadn’t had to get up at 6.

Marks out of 10?
A solid 9.

Would you meet again?
Yes, we talked about going to the theatre.

• Richard and Charlie ate at Señor Ceviche <http://senor-ceviche.com/>, London 
W1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com <>. For a free three-day 
trial of Soulmates, go tosoulmates.theguardian.com 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/>
