
Q We live in a Seventies house with a natural brick feature in the lounge. The 
previous owners got more gloss paint on the bricks than on the window frames! 
Is there anything that can remove paint from porous brick? I really don't want 
to paint them, as they fit with the Seventies design. Many thanks.
Lizzie Rymer, Leeds

A The last time I removed paint from internal brickwork was with a 
high-pressure water and sand jet spray - yes, it removed the paint, but it also 
covered the place with a fine damp grit, and the house looked like a bomb had 
hit it. Luckily there is now an easier, more environmentally friendly way to 
remove up to four layers of paint. Paint and Varnish Remover by Home Strip is a 
solvent-free gel that sticks to horizontal and vertical surfaces. Unlike 
conventional paint removers it doesn't give off toxic fumes or burn the skin. 
Simply apply the gel and leave for an hour before removing with a scraper and 
wire brush. If you can face the clean-up, a water-jet spray will help you get 
right into the pores of the brickwork. Two litres (£20.83) should cover 8-10 sq 
m (www.brewers.co.uk <http://www.brewers.co.uk>).

Q Do you have any suggestions for a stylish light fitting to replace a dated 
one as the main central light hanging from a living-room ceiling? I don't 
particularly want to make a statement, but don't want to put in spotlights 
either. The house itself is modern. It must be possible to improve on the 
current fitting. I just can't find any inspiration in the usual quarters.
Mia Johnson, Dublin

A The one mistake I often find is that we tend to ask too much of our ceiling 
pendant lights. Remember to supplement general lights with task lights such as 
side (or table) lights and mood lights, such as fairy lights or warm-coloured 
lights. While three lighting systems may seem excessive, it will make your 
living room a more flexible space for activities such as reading, entertaining 
or just relaxing. Lastly, choose a shade that will conceal the energy-saving 
bulbs that you will naturally want to use: it's the easiest way to do your bit 
for the environment and save yourself more than a few pennies this winter. Go to
www.thelightingsuperstore.co.uk <http://www.thelightingsuperstore.co.uk>.

·  If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
