
Court fee increases that were hastily introduced to plug a £100m hole in the 
Ministry of Justice’s budget were based on “hopeless” evidence, according to 
the most senior civil judge in England and Wales.


Giving evidence to the justice select committee, the Master of the Rolls, John 
Dyson, highlighted the financial problems of the department under which the 
government is trying to make the justice system self-financing.


In what amounted to a display of judicial alarm at MoJ policy under the 
previous justice secretary, Chris Grayling, three of the most senior civil 
judges warned of the danger of raising tribunal and court fees too high.

“Enhanced fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/jan/21/ministry-of-justice-court-fees-chris-grayling>
” are designed to make a profit, charging claimants more than the 
administrative cost of the service.


“The users of the civil courts are subisdising the family courts and criminal 
courts,” Lord Dyson said on Tuesday. “I think it’s wrong in principle … but 
it’s a policy matter as to whether parliament should go down that route.

“It is, I’m afraid, why the risk of denying access to justice for a lot of 
people is so intense in these proposals.”

People in small enterprises and business would be deterred from litigation, 
Dyson said.


Fee increases “won’t deter rich people but small businesses. With the type of 
people this government said it wanted to encourage because they will be the 
engine for [economic] growth, many of them are most at risk.”


Dyson continued: “We have warned of the real dangers and we also warned that 
the reseach carried out by the government before it embarked on this course of 
action was lamentable.”

Only 31 calls were made to ask what impact it would have, mainly to wealthier 
court users who could afford the increase in fees, he said.

“We warned that this research was hopeless but the impression I had was, such 
was the need to rush this through because there was a great big gap in the 
finances which had to be plugged … There’s a big hole in the department’s 
finances. We were told there’s a £100m shortfall for justice.

“[The MoJ] made assumptions that demand would not be affected by these changes 
and they based that assumption on a very, very limited evidential base … I’m 
extremely sceptical about that assumption.”


Dyson acknowledged that £700m had been made available for court modernisation, 
but observed: “The government’s track record on IT projects is not exactly 
shining.”


Sir James Munby, the judge in charge of the family courts, said the 
administrative cost of a divorce was around £200 but the MoJ considered 
charging £750. It was eventually fixed at a profit-making level of £550.

Any divorce must go through the courts. 


“Can we continue putting fees up until it becomes another poll tax on wheels?” 
Munby asked. “Those who want to divorce will probably still do so through 
gritted teeth but it doesn’t mean you can keep on putting up the fees.”

By comparison, he said, it cost around £100 to register a marriage. “People 
will see that it doesn’t cost six or eight times as much to get divorced as it 
does to get married.”

He said one of the first legal functions to go online was likely to be 
divorce. “It won’t take long to work out that the cost of administering it 
online is a fiction.”

Making it possible to process a divorce online was fairly straightforward 
compared with other types of cases, Munby added.

“If it can’t be done we are in very big trouble. I have been discussing online 
divorce with [MoJ] officials for several months now.

“I’m becoming increasingly concerned and the current position is that the 
ability to deliver it is a question on which the jury is out. I’m disappointed 
about where we have got to after many months of work. I still have no clear 
answers to such basic questions as what is the overall timeline for this 
process.”

Sir Ernest Ryder, who is in charge of employment and immigration tribunals, 
said increases in fees for employment tribunals had resulted in a 70% fall in 
the number of claims being brought over a single year.

“That’s an extraordinary position that demands an explanation,” he told MPs. 


There was no evidence, as some had argued, that a rise in fees had deterred 
supposedly spurious claims, he said.


At justice questions in the Commons shortly afterwards, Labour justice 
spokesman Andy Slaughter took up Lord Dyson’s comments. “The Master of the 
Rolls described the fee increases affecting civil litigants of small businesses 
as a desperate way of carrying on based on hopeless research,” he said. “It is 
another car crash. Is it time for another U-turn?”

The justice secretary, Michael Gove, replied: “One of the biggest barriers to 
justice, as the Master of the Rolls and others have pointed out, is costs. 
Action needs to be taken to reduce costs in civil justice. It is not enough 
simply to say that the taxpayer must shoulder the burden. We need reform of our 
legal system to make access to justice easier for all.”
