
In a rash moment, because I cannot cook very well, I invite an American 
paediatrician to dinner. He's a sort of colleague who has been to England many 
times before. If I had been even once to Boston he would have held a party for 
me or at least had me over for dinner. Suddenly ashamed that I have never even 
offered him a cup of tea, I invite him over. I'm also interested in watching 
how a paediatrician behaves with kids.

So B comes over. I've remembered that I can cook something – lasagne, and 
what's more I did it earlier while Flora was asleep, so when B gets to our 
house I manage to show him I can look after the children and give him something 
to eat.

B, it turns out, has a direct approach with children. He introduces himself to 
them in a loud voice and wades right in. "How did you feel when your mother 
became pregnant?" he asks Tilly, who is 11. I wait for Tilly to use a variation 
of her new word – "degrading", which she applies to almost everything I do, but 
she merely tells him it was a little strange.

"Do you find you have less time with your mum now she has a baby?" he fires at 
Lydia, who's eight. Apparently not, as I have noticed her climbing on my bed in 
the morning to kiss the baby first and me second.

Simultaneously, seeing baby Flora is dribbling, he confidently – and unasked – 
sticks a finger into her mouth (unwashed I notice) and announces that contrary 
to what we might think, she is not teething.

It's a good visit, special even, because B says something that sticks in my 
mind. I can't remember what it was in relation to, but it was the sort of 
homespun, apple pie philosophy that I'm a sucker for. He said, albeit after a 
few glasses of wine: "In life, you never regret what you spend or do, only what 
you don't spend and don't do."

So after dropping him back at the tube station, I decide to do something I 
have been meaning to do for six years. I decide to take my 86-year-old mother 
to see the Grand Canyon. My mother has been quietly ticking off the great 
sights of the world. The Great Wall of China, the Taj Mahal, and the Pyramids. 
Next stop the Grand Canyon, she has said, before she either goes blind or dies.

There may be a little emotional blackmail in this but I am more than ready to 
fall for it. Watching her with baby Flora is a rather moving experience. Since 
the baby arrived, my mother has forgotten any aches or pains she had, she's 
lost weight from playing "Look, Flora's flying" and looks younger than me (as 
does everyone). But along with her new found vigour is the awareness, well mine 
anyway, that unlike with some of her other grandchildren, she's unlikely to 
live long enough to see Flora grown up. So J and I decide that money is not 
important and therefore we will all go to see the Grand Canyon with my mum. 
Sorting out a road trip with a baby one end and an 86-year-old at the other is 
not easy.

Neither is getting insurance for my mother. No one wants to insure someone 
who's over 85. "These old people," says one sales person, "when they go on 
holiday they get a new lease of life and start doing things they don't normally 
do and then, wham, they've had a blackout."

Our first quote comes in at £700 – at that rate you'd feel obliged to use your 
health insurance, we decide. But finally we get something that seems fair. So 
it's off we go on our ridiculous holiday. Friends smile and tell us it will be 
great. "You never regret what you spend or do," I say to them, wisely. "Only 
what you don't spend and don't do."
