
Michael Bywater (When a manly pat on the back won’t do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/31/men-culture-grieving-robert-peston-male-insensitivity>
, 1 August) correctly points to the salience of culture in shaping our 
responses to grief, but when he writes “We have grown to distrust rationality; 
feeling is the new thinking”, whom is he referring to? For some, grief has to 
be stowed away because, in rational terms, they cannot allow it to dominate 
their lives when earning a living and supporting children have priority. They 
are not in a position to cogitate on “the rewriting of what it means to be 
human”.

Those who are at the forefront of this discourse, though, are not necessarily 
harbingers of change when it comes to responses to grief. Some years ago I was 
working in a Russell Group university and the response I received, on the death 
of my wife, from a female professor of sociology, was: “Oh, I wouldn’t like 
that.” Clearly indicating, as Bywater puts it, that the new message is “We’re 
all in it together”. Really?
David Graham
Hampshire

Related: Our culture of grieving is changing: a manly pat on the back will no 
longer do | Michael Bywater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/31/men-culture-grieving-robert-peston-male-insensitivity>

• When my husband died many years ago, friends and relations fell into two 
groups: those who said the right thing and those who were crass. Our children 
and I puzzled over this and then realised that those who got it right had each 
suffered a significant loss roughly between the ages of 15 and 25, except one 
whose loss was unknown to us. Years later this friend told me that at the age 
of 17 she had been obliged to give up a child for adoption so she too fitted 
the hypothesis. It seems that we need to feel a loss at a period of development 
and learn to process it in order to be able to empathise with others’ grief.
Janie Penn-Barwell
Bishopstoke, Hampshire

• Writing about male emotional inexpressiveness, and the insensitivity to the 
suffering of others that it leads to, Michael Bywater says it is “not men but 
culture”. But it is in reality masculine culture, which has its roots in the 
stiff upper lip required of men governing an empire of racial inferiors. The 
empire is no more, but British males continue to psychologically construct 
themselves in contrast to women – tough, aggressive, reticent and invulnerable. 
And their ability to partake in discussions relating to fundamental existential 
issues such as love, sex or death is often subverted by defensive humour.

A start to change this could begin in schools, incorporating feminist insights 
relating to the nature of the social construction of manhood into the 
curriculum.
Sydney Peiris
Wolverhampton, West Midlands

• Michael Bywater clearly needs to read the bestselling anthology Poems That 
Make Grown Men Cry, coedited by me and my son Ben Holden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/06/poems-make-grown-men-cry-extract>
. Its mission is to encourage men to show their true emotions, to let their 
tears flow. And its manifesto is: “Abolish the British stiff upper lip!”
Anthony Holden
London
