
The chairman of the new press regulator has said he wants to put a “red 
pencil” though the complex set of rules governing the industry that offers 
publishers “eight or nine opportunities to obfuscate and resist investigations”.

Sir Alan Moses, who oversees the Independent Press Standards Organisation 
(Ipso) – the successor to the Press Complaints Commission – which came into 
force on 8 September last year, said the organisation had gone to editors and 
publishers with a redrafted set of guidelines.Ipso 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> inherited the editors’ code of practice 
from the PCC.

Moses, giving evidence to the House of Lords communications select committee 
on Tuesday, said: “One of the things we have done is redraft rules that we 
can’t understand or we think are contradictory.

“We have gone to them with proposals that require a large amount of red pencil 
through these rules, getting rid of ... the eight or nine opportunities to 
obfuscate and resist investigations.

“We had a very useful meeting with their representatives a week ago. They are 
considering it.”

Waving a copy of the rules before the committee of peers, Moses said he wanted 
to have a “simple and understandable means by which we can investigate 
deliberate or repeated breaches of the code”.

He described the current system of rules and regulations as “opaque, sometimes 
self contradictory, difficult to understand, sometimes difficult to find”.

“Whatever system you put in place you have got to consult with those you are 
going to regulate, although obviously there is going to be a debate who has the 
final word,” added Moses.

Ipso now monitors 69 publishers covering 1,400 publications and 1,000 websites 
according to Moses, who appeared before the committee with Ipso’s chief 
executive, Matt Tee.

Moses said the nascent organisation, which has a budget of £2.4m in its first 
year, £500,000 more than the PCC, plus £500,000 in transition costs, had to 
“gain the trust of the press and those who distrust us and fear abuse”.

He said the key element was to put in place the structure and rules which 
would enable it to prove “how we monitor, investigate and reach decisions are 
free from control by other people, free from that hallmark of power and 
control, namely secrecy. Transparency is absolutely key.”

Moses said Ipso would not seek recognition under the royal charter drawn up by 
the government to underpin a new press regulator, in the face of staunch 
opposition from large parts of the industry, because its members did not want 
it. “There is no point seeking recognition from something they have set their 
face against,” he said.

He said the regulator was looking to create a system of compulsory arbitration.

Ipso is backed by all the main national, regional and local newspaper 
publishers and magazine companies. However, the Financial Times has chosen not 
to join, along with the Independent and Guardian, whose editor in chief,Alan 
Rusbridger <http://www.theguardian.com/media/alanrusbridger>, also gave 
evidence to the committee on Tuesday.

Asked how Ipso had to change before he would consider joining, Rusbridger 
said: “We need to hear from Sir Alan [Moses] and his board as to whether they 
feel they have the freedom from the industry to do the things they should do as 
a regulator.

“If you’ve got the chair of the body saying there are certain things he 
regards as pretty fundamental [that need changing] we should listen to him.”

Rusbridger said he had “always believed it is better for the press all to be 
altogether in one body”.

“It would be the healthier solution for the industry to make the concessions 
to Sir Alan and his board that they want so you have a comprehensive, robust, 
independent, simple to understand regulator.

“I think that the Guardian – I can’t speak for the others – would probably 
consider joining and I think we would be in an altogether healthier situation 
with a stronger regulator that would apply to the whole of the press. That 
would be a desirable thing.”
