
I am not a fan of rice cakes. They are worthy and dull, even the ones that 
have chocolate on them. But today as I push baby Flora round the supermarket in 
the trolley she starts moaning. Inexplicably, I grab some baby rice cakes off 
the shelf, open them up (before I've paid for them) and give her one. Flora is 
still on the puree stage of weaning. So I stop in the middle of an aisle to 
check that she can deal with her first solid object. She holds it in her fist 
and sucks on it. Before long the rice cake has disappeared. It's a Flora first.

As soon as I get home, I shout up to Tilly and Lydia and tell them of their 
sister's achievement. "Can I feed her a rice cake?" asks Tilly. "Clever Flora."

Lydia pulls one out of the packet, bites it and shudders. "Yuck," she says. 
"How old was I when I first ate a rice cake?"

I'm not sure if Lydia even ate a baby rice cake, but the problem is more 
global than that. Long before Lydia was born, I'd stopped committing even 
important milestones to memory. Now I envy parents who made notes of their 
children's developmental steps. Children really do want to know how much they 
weighed when they were born and when they took their first steps. Lucky Flora, 
to have her milestones seen by at least six people. "I'll be able to tell Flora 
what she did because she won't remember," says Lydia. "How she loved mashed 
up bananas and shrieked with excitement when she watched In the Night Garden."

"But she doesn't like bananas and she hasn't watched In the Night Garden," I 
say.

"Oh, whatever," says Lydia.

Flora's milestones have prompted a flood of enquiries from my other children 
about their own development. Even Sam, who's 22, wants to know when he started 
talking. "Well, you used to surprise me by singing nursery rhymes in the car 
when you were little," I say, hoping to fob him off.

"But exactly how old was I?" he asks.

"About 18 months," I say, guessing. "But you were definitely 13 when you 
started grunting."

I feel particularly bad that I can't remember each of their first words – what 
was I doing? I can only remember Maddy's because I was about to drag her off to 
a speech therapist when she suddenly pointed upwards and said "Light!" Looking 
back, I wonder if she hadn't bothered because she thought we weren't interested.

On Lydia's last birthday, she wanted to know her time of birth. "It's not 
officially my birthday until after the time I was born," says Lydia. I ask J 
for an exact timing – I know it was morning, but he's as vague as I am. "All 
the children were born around 4am," he says, which seems unlikely.

"Do you know when you were born?" I ask him.

It turns out he knows precisely. "Ten to nine in the morning."

"How do you know that?"

"My mum told me."

I go back to Lydia and give her an estimated time of arrival around 4am. 
"Anyway," I tell her, "the whole day is your birthday."

But I finally understand part of why they want to know. It's about working out 
where they come relative to each other. I get this only after Flora blows her 
first raspberry.

"How old was I when I first blew a raspberry?" asks Lydia. "Because I think 
Flora might have done it before me."

"No," I say, wanting to smile at the idea I could remember milestones at the 
level of detail of raspberry blowing. "I am sure you blew raspberries before 
she did."
