
When I first realised I was pregnant, I laughed. It just didn’t seem real. I 
thought straight away about telling you but I didn’t want you to worry. You had 
enough stress. I was 21 and felt I could carry this burden by myself. You need 
never know. As you had told me several times, what you don’t know won’t hurt 
you.

A waiting room at an abortion clinic is as tense as it is silent. The room is 
full of people but the air is cold. Eye contact is minimal, and when it does 
occur it is stony and unsympathetic. I sat opposite a girl perhaps my age or 
slightly younger. I felt a pang of empathy watching her furiously tapping away 
at Candy Crush. I understood that any escape from this reality was inviting.

Her mother returned from the toilet and sat beside her, whispered a word of 
encouragement in her ear and put a hand on her leg. In that moment my 
compassion melted away like butter. I was so envious. My cheeks burned red and 
I could feel the tears behind my eyes. I thought of you, probably at home and 
oblivious. I wanted so much to be that girl. It didn’t matter who told me I 
would be OK because I knew it never would be OK without you. But I stayed 
stoic, for I thought the only way to get through it was to be detached and 
above it.

I told myself you had more pressing issues to worry about when, deep down, I 
knew that you would have been by my side in a heartbeat.

When I had my ultrasound I thought of you and how I’d pictured this moment so 
differently. I imagined how my first ultrasound should have been, perhaps with 
you holding my hand in a flurry of nervous excitement or on the other end of 
the phone awaiting an image with baited breath.

When the nurse accidentally showed me my scan photo, I thought of how exultant 
you must have felt when you saw your first scan of me.

The nurse hurriedly hid the photograph without so much as an apology, or a 
glance of acknowledgment of this colossal mistake. In that moment I felt so 
guilty. I was seven weeks conceived once too – why did I get the chance to be 
here? Why was I lucky enough to have you? Had I deserved you at all?

In the car, I broke down. I turned to my boyfriend streaming with tears and I 
told him how scared I was. I told him how much I wanted you and he told me I 
should call you. But I couldn’t worry you. I was independent and could do this 
alone. You didn’t need such insignificant worries, worries that were being 
dealt with.

A few weeks later, I had my termination. It is so different to how it seems on 
the television; it always looks so quick and easy. I changed into a blue paper 
gown and disposable slippers and all my belongings were stuffed into a hard 
plastic trolley case, like I was going on holiday. The backs of my legs were 
exposed and slapped harshly against the plastic chairs; my cold, clammy skin 
stuck unforgivingly to its surface. The tables were littered with safe-sex 
leaflets and glossy gossip magazines. I thought how patronising and quite 
frankly, unpunctual, these leaflets were, and that you might have made that 
same observation.

I was sitting opposite a woman around your age, but this time she wore the 
blue paper gown and had the hand luggage too. She reminded me of you. But there 
was no comfort in the comparison, for I would never have wanted you to feel the 
way I was feeling or to go through the turmoil that rattled through my head to 
my heart to my stomach. We sat in silence without so much as a knowing glance, 
though a part of me longed for her to cuddle me like a mother and tell me I 
would be OK, just like you would have.

Finally, when I was called to the anaesthetist, I truly felt regret, and a 
fear I had never even imagined before the very second I was laid out vulnerable 
on the surgical table. I was thinking of you, and how I wished I had told you. 
And I knew in my heart at that moment that you would have wished I’d told you 
too.


I imagined, irrationally, that I might die and how much I would miss you and 
Dad, and that you would miss me terribly too. I imagined how heartbroken you 
would be that I hadn’t thought to tell you. I felt anguish over how you would 
assume that I hadn’t trusted you enough and how you might wonder where you had 
gone wrong and punish yourself. I agonised that I would have no chance to 
explain and to tell you that you are the most wonderful mum in the world.

When I woke up I thought of you and just how lucky I am to have you.

Anonymous

• This article was changed on 18 April to remove some personal details. 
