
If you are asking me how to send a dish back in a restaurant, then you are 
asking perhaps the wrong person. For my advice about sending a dish back in a 
restaurant would be: don't do it, my friend. Not if you want to live until the 
end of your meal. Not if you want to sip your overpriced espresso and wonder 
all over again why two salads, an asparagus risotto, one portion of grilled 
chicken and a slice of lemon tart costs more than your sofa. Chefs don't like 
it when you send their food back. It is a metaphoric slap around the chops with 
a cold kipper in front of the whole restaurant. They find it humiliating, not 
humbling. How many episodes of Ready Steady Cook or Hell's Kitchen does it take 
to convince the public that cheffy is the king of current society? Need I 
remind you of Catherine Zeta-Jones starring as an uptight chef in the film No 
Reservations? Especially the scene where she spears an uncooked steak onto a 
customer's table after he had sent it back twice because it wasn't rare enough? 
Talk about an Oscar-winning display of raw emotion! I mean the steak, of 
course, not Catherine. Bad chefs in particular do not like it when you send bad 
food back. They really, really don't. 'So she doesn't like how I garnish her 
guinea fowl with girolles, eh?' Blam, blam, blam, blam. 'See how she likes it 
now, when I garnish it with the heel of my clog.'

Believe me, this sort of stuff happens. On the other hand, a good chef will be 
genuinely concerned. A million innocent things can and do go wrong in a kitchen 
every day. Most cooks will want to right the perceived wrong and send you home 
happy into the night. They will try to fix the problem. Even if it's not a 
problem at all. I mean, it's hardly fair to send back your grilled halibut 
because you think it's boring. Maybe it is boring, but you should have thought 
of that before you ordered it.

Likewise, it's hard to understand the insouciance of those about to drop £200 
on dinner who don't pay proper attention to the menu. They sort of alight on 
the word 'lamb' or 'duck' and just go for it without studying the small print. 
Then they get upset when unexpected testicles and neck gizzards suddenly arrive 
in front of them. But look on the bright side. At least now they know how it 
feels to be wardrobe mistress on a Rolling Stones tour.

Of course, some dishes should never, ever be sent back to the kitchen. They 
should be hurled in the direction of the swinging doors with great force. Among 
their number would be any seafood dishes that smell of ammonia, anything except 
Melba toast that curls up at the edges and objects that manage to move all by 
themselves across the plate. But please do it nicely. Don't wave your arms 
about and shout, 'My dog wouldn't eat this crap!' even if it might be true. 
Just explain the problem and ask them to sort it out. If it really is a serious 
hygiene issue, then leave the premises forthwith and I mean it. Why even take 
the risk? You see something small and furry moving across the carpet that's not 
a Scottish singer called Lulu? It's time to exit stage left.

Other things that should be returned to sender include, in theory, any hot 
dishes that are cold and vice versa. Anything not cooked correctly, or as 
requested, or obviously mistreated or adulterated in some way? Back, back, 
back. Yet it is never quite as simple as that, is it? Say, for example, your 
turbot arrives cold. You send it back to the kitchen. Most chefs will merely 
reheat it, which will just make it hot and tough - a condition known as a 
Daniel Craig, in the trade. The same thing applies with overdone or underdone 
steaks.

My strategy is to go with a wide margin of error either way - just to keep the 
table bonhomie intact and the evening go with a swing. For nobody goes to a 
restaurant to send food back. We go to have a good time with our friends, not 
moan about the state of the entrees or to break our teeth on the spaghetti. 
However, if you are going to complain, don't take more than a few mouthfuls. 
Otherwise, you won't have any credibility, you greedy pig. Don't forget that 
the degree of warmth with which your server asks, 'Was everything all right?' 
will be in direct proportion to their huffy froideur when you tell them, 'No, 
it was not'. Enjoy!

3 restaurants where you shouldn't need to

Murano
20 Queen Street, London W1, 020 7592 1222

Fancy sending anything back to chef Angela Hartnett? No fear! Ange looks like 
she would wrestle any moaners into a headlock and out into the Mayfair gutters 
before they could say 'al dente'. Not that there's much to complain about in 
her plush new restaurant. I love the perfect zabaglione, served in little 
copper pots.

Giaconda Dining Room
9 Denmark Street, London WC2, 020 7240 3334 

Paul Merrony is the kind of chef who sends diners home happy. He has 
user-friendly prices, great service and a downhome charm. Lovely dishes include 
chicken liver and juniper pâté; fishcakes with tartare sauce and roast chicken 
for two. He says it's the tiniest restaurant kitchen in London and there's no 
room for mistakes.

Hix Oyster & Fish House
Cobb Road, Lyme Regis, Dorset, 01297 446910

Actually I did have to send my fish back here; a sad lemon sole with some 
dried-out surf clams and a wash of soggy samphire. They took it off the bill, 
and while this is always appreciated, it is scant compensation for a ruined 
lunch. Perhaps the kitchen was having an off day? It is a lovely spot, however, 
with views of the sea and the famous Cobb.

· These restaurants and hundreds more are on Jan's restaurant website 
<http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk>.
