
Instant gardens normally belong to the realm of the TV makeover: decking in a 
hurry with a nail gun and horticulture all but hidden. Yet Keith and Ros Wiley 
have spent some 20 years developing and fine-tuning a style of gardening that 
is almost all about plants. One of the many benefits of this approach is that 
it gives results fast.

It took the Wileys just four years to carve out a one-and-a-half-acre garden 
from a flat field in Devon, and much of the planting looked great in its first 
year. Keith remembers contouring the earth of one bed in the morning, planting 
it up in the afternoon and his wife deeming it good enough to paint that same 
evening.

But this is a wet, windy site facing south on a hilltop, and planted 
windbreaks take 10 years. So Keith used a mini digger to throw up 2m banks and 
dig down a further 2m, in so doing contouring the land, pushing the wind over 
the top, creating shade and improving drainage.

The garden looks stunning in September (above), but it peaks earlier in 
summer, with kniphofia, agapanthus, day lilies and crocosmia. For winter there 
are witchhazels, heathers, crocus, snowdrops and early daffodils. Keith's goal 
is to see sheets of colour at all times. Perennials and bulbous plants tend to 
fill out quickly, so, coupled with the sheer volume of plant material here, 
success is swift.

· Creating a garden in a hurry leaves little time for maintenance. Everything 
is cut down at Christmas, then weeded and mulched with stable manure, with just 
one further weeding session in spring

· Taller plants such as Campanula lactiflora are cut back in mid-May, and 
asters in June, so that they branch and remain compact, which makes them 
self-supporting without the need for staking

· In winter, once everything has been cut down, the rolling banks have a 
presence of their own, like a Henry Moore sculpture, which soon becomes 
smothered in spring flowering bulbs

· Unexpectedly for this style of planting, there are dozens of Japanese 
maples, but this is loosely naturalistic planting inspired by the wild, and the 
wild doesn't have rules

· The slopes create a greater surface area for planting than a piece of flat 
ground, so as you look across at the banks, you see a phenomenal amount of 
plants in any one view
