
This month, 40 members of the army reserve will head to Free Town, Sierra 
Leone on a 16 day training exercise. They are part of the medical operational 
support group (MOSG), a unit that was formed in the wake of the Ebola crisis, 
which gives specialist support to military exercises and operations worldwide.

The exercise is intended to help the army understand, discover and develop its 
ability to provide healthcare support in challenging environments. The MOSG is 
used to provide many services including: medical expertise in command and staff 
work; health sector development; humanitarian relief; clinical mentoring and 
advisory capability; medical intelligence; environmental health expertise and 
clinical specialists. It is also made up entirely of members from the army 
reserve.

Major Stuart Shields is a GP in the NHS and uses that experience as a 
pre-hospital care advisor in MOSG. His aim in Sierra Leone is to get a better 
understanding of how to gather local health intelligence and build networks, 
and allocate the appropriate resources quickly. At the same time, he will learn 
the best way to protect our troops, while also developing a sustainable primary 
care health service for the local population that meets their needs.

Shields adds that the opportunity to travel in the army reserve has been an 
integral part of the role: “We are all employed according to our civilian 
qualifications and experience but we have to be confident that we can deliver 
when it’s a more challenging environment,” he says. “It’s all very well 
delivering on your day job but it’s a different matter when the circumstances 
are less than ideal and you are in tents using simple but robust equipment. 
There’s no substitute for actually being there in the field.

“Last year as part of the army reserve, I worked on delivering primary care 
from a mobile hospital in an earthquake response scenario and I learned an 
incredible amount about everything from advanced trauma life support to 
workload management, paperwork, and referral pathways. It gave me lots of ideas 
about how an urgent care centre in the UK could be set up if needed. [Such] 
leadership training would have been extremely difficult to replicate in a 
civilian scenario.”

Major Janet Kelly is the media operational officer for MOSG, who works as a 
lecturer in healthcare law and ethics at the University of Hull in civilian 
life. She will be capturing the lessons learned on the exercise and sharing 
them with the military and academic world. This, she explains, is a critical 
part of ensuring the success of future crisis support and training exercises – 
particularly when it comes to matching local need with western expertise.

“In the past, western focused medical aid was sometimes parachuted in and not 
really best matched to the local skills on the ground or sustainable in the 
long term,” she says. “Creating best practice procedures that are locally 
appropriate is a big part of what we are going to gain and should also help us 
to better plan a medical exit strategy. This will mean that the people we help 
are not suddenly left without the resources or skills to continue helping the 
local population.

“I find my role incredibly fulfilling and would encourage anyone to give it a 
go. There really is something for everyone and so many opportunities to make a 
difference”.

To find out more about how you can reach 100% of your potential in 10% of your 
time, search army reserve officer, or call 0345 7622611.
