
How are you meant to feel the day before your wedding? "Are you excited, 
Mummy?" asks Lydia, who's nine. "This is the last day that your father and I 
will be living in sin," I say, although J and I will not be living in sin this 
evening. He will be banished to his mother's in the tradition of not seeing the 
bride on the morning of the wedding. "What's living in sin?" asks Lydia.

"It's an old-fashioned phrase," I start to reply, but she has lost interest 
and is admiring her wedding haircut in the mirror.

I'm not sure that I am excited. But I do feel strange. An old school friend 
sends me a text saying "You don't have to go through with it". It's a joke, but 
it makes me feel even more strange. I had thought that getting married would be 
a fairly trivial step for us. How much more committed can you be with children 
and a mortgage? Yet getting married feels – even to a woman approaching 50 – 
like a very grown up thing to do.

On the way to dropping J off at his mother's, we have a chance to show each 
other just how grown up we are. We have a heated argument over a parking space. 
J insists there is one right outside his mother's house – I think it's over a 
driveway. But after shouting at each other with uncharacteristic venom, I turn 
the car round and – thwack – hit a lamppost.

J is furious. I am even more furious. I get out of the car and leave it strewn 
across the road. We both shout some more. J tells no one in particular that his 
wife (that'll be me) has gone mad. I feel slightly touched by his use of "wife".

"I'm not marrying you," I say, maturely, because of course I am.

At J's mother's house we have a drink with his sisters and quietly apologise 
to each other.

"I feel quite excited about tomorrow now," says J, as we say goodbye to each 
other.

Back home, the girls have their bridesmaid's dresses laid out, their nails 
done and the younger ones at least are too excited to sleep. "Can I sleep in 
your bed?" asks Lydia, who was the chief protagonist for getting her father to 
sleep the night at his mother's house. I had suspected all along that there was 
an ulterior motive. "No," I say, "but if you wake up early in the morning you 
can come in."

Meanwhile, Sam, who's 22, is arguing with my mother over whether he should go 
out with his friends or not.

"You'll be up all night and we won't be able to get you up the next day," 
she says.

"But I need to get hold of P to borrow his suit," says Sam.

This is true because despite trying to buy Sam a suit for the past few weeks, 
he is still officially without one. I'm not sure he has anything other than 
trainers to wear. "What time is the wedding?" I ask him – as a test. "It's at 
2pm," he says. "Mum, I'll be back in time. I promise."

I take a deep breath and hug him. "OK, I trust you. But if you haven't got a 
suit by 10am tomorrow we'll have to rush out and get you one."

As Sam goes out for the night, I go up to bed. Baby Flora has suddenly 
developed a cold and at midnight the house is quiet but I am jigging Flora 
around and singing to her rather frantically. This isn't the night before the 
wedding that I had imagined.

Finally, she goes off to sleep. But it seems like only a couple of hours 
before Lydia opens the bedroom door. "I heard a noise downstairs," she says.

It is 6am. Earlier than she gets up for Christmas.

"Happy wedding day."
