
"What would like to cook?" asks the Stirrin' Stuff questionnaire

"Cake" is written in a firm, seven-year-old's hand.

"Do you eat five a day of fruit & vegetables?" asks the questionnaire.

The "No" box is ticked.

"Do you think you should eat more fruit & vegetables?" asks the questionnaire.

"Yes. Sort of," is the comment.

"What did you enjoy most?"

"EVERYTHING," is the comment.

The problems children have with food are too well known to need repeating 
here, and the situation in Scotland is, if anything, worse than it is elsewhere 
in the UK. Fiona Bird is a woman with a mission. She wants to change the way 
children relate to food. She is the force behind Stirrin' Stuff, a campaign 
designed to encourage children to learn how to prepare and cook food. The 
emphasis is on the practical, getting them and their parents handling food, 
cooking and eating it together.

Fi never set out to lead a crusade. She stumbled or, rather, cooked her way 
into becoming a champion of Scottish children's right to decent food pretty 
much by accident. In 2001 she reached the final of Scottish Masterchef. I 
suppose being a mother of six and a firm believer in the old-fashioned virtues 
of proper cooking and eating together had given her a certain amount of 
practice. Still, it says a good deal for Fi's determination that she made the 
great leap from domestic goddess to queen of the cookery competition.

Anyway, as a result, that great exemplar of Scottish cooking, Nick Nairn, 
asked Fi to do a demonstration at his cookery school. Nervous of carrying the 
day on her own, she asked one of her daughters to help turn the event into a 
mother-and-daughter show. "I found I really enjoyed it. And then other people 
asked me to do the same thing and I became aware that there was a gap out 
there. I was really surprised that a lot of mums and kids just didn't know how 
easy cooking can be. And how enjoyable." This is the way new careers are born. 
And then along came Jamie Oliver and School Dinners, and Stirrin' Stuff was 
born.

It sort of works like this: "A week ago I did a demo in Rattray in 
Perthshire," Fi says. "I had been approached by a headmistress who had a bit of 
funding. I was very keen to get the parents involved, too. These days you have 
to be very careful - risk assessments and things like that; after all, kids 
will be handling sharp knives. So I tell them a bit about health and hygiene 
and food labelling, so they know what to look out for when they're buying their 
food. And then we do a few practical, simple bits of cookery, so they can start 
learning the skills. It's a bit like learning to ride a bike - you need to 
master a few basic things first, and then away you go."

Fi acts like a frontier food marshal. She gallops from school to school, from 
community to community, bringing with her experience, passion and boundless 
enthusiasm. The scandal is, of course, that this is all ad hoc. At a time when 
local and central authorities should be providing a constant flow of funding to 
the likes of Fi, what actually happens is more haphazard. Short-term funding, 
she says, is always a problem, in spite of the generosity of such sponsors as 
Scotherbs and Highland Spring. She still wants more community food projects and 
cooking clubs, and to put together a book of recipes based on her work, and to 
extend her realm to include the many islands that lie off the Scottish coast, 
and - well, there's always more.

Fi knows that what she does is not going to change the world overnight. She 
takes a rather more philosophical approach to her mission . "It's a bit like 
throwing mud against a wall," she says. "I hope something sticks."
