
In Britain, the link between private boarding education and leadership is 
gold-plated. If their parents can afford it, children are sent away from home 
to walk a well-trodden path that leads straight from boarding school through 
Oxbridge to high office in institutions such as the judiciary, the army, the 
City and, especially, government. Our prime minister was only seven when he was 
sent away to board at Heatherdown preparatory school in Berkshire. Like so many 
of the men who hold leadership roles in Britain, he learned to adapt his young 
character to survive both the loss of his family and the demands of boarding 
school culture. The psychological impact of these formative experiences on 
Cameron and other boys who grow up to occupy positions of great power and 
responsibility cannot be overstated. It leaves them ill-prepared for 
relationships in the adult world and the nation with a cadre of leaders who 
perpetuate a culture of elitism, bullying and misogyny affecting the whole of 
society.

Nevertheless, this golden path is as sure today as it was 100 years ago, when 
men from such backgrounds led us into a disastrous war; it is familiar, 
sometimes mocked, but taken for granted. But it is less well known that costly, 
elite boarding consistently turns out people who appear much more competent 
than they actually are. They are particularly deficient in non-rational skills, 
such as those needed to sustain relationships, and are not, in fact, 
well-equipped to be leaders in today's world

I have been doing psychotherapy with ex-boarders for 25 years and I am a 
former boarding-school teacher and boarder. My pioneering study ofprivileged 
abandonment <http://www.boardingconcern.org.uk/home.php?home=yes> always sparks 
controversy: so embedded in British life is boarding that many struggle to see 
beyond the elitism and understand its impact. The prevalence of 
institutionalised abuse is finally emerging to public scrutiny, but the effects 
of normalised parental neglect are more widespread and much less obvious. Am I 
saying, then, that David Cameron, and the majority of our ruling elite, were 
damaged by boarding?

It's complex. My studies show that children survive boarding by cutting off 
their feelings and constructing a defensively organised self that severely 
limits their later lives. Cameron, Boris Johnson, Jeremy Hunt, Andrew Mitchell, 
Oliver Letwin et al tick all the boxes for being boarding-school survivors. For 
socially privileged children are forced into a deal not of their choosing, 
where a normal family-based childhood is traded for the hothousing of 
entitlement. Prematurely separated from home and family, from love and touch, 
they must speedily reinvent themselves as self-reliant pseudo-adults.

Paradoxically, they then struggle to properly mature, since the child who was 
not allowed to grow up organically gets stranded, as it were, inside them. In 
consequence, an abandoned child complex within such adults ends up running the 
show. This is why many British politicians appear so boyish. They are also 
reluctant to open their ranks to women, who are strangers to them and 
unconsciously held responsible for their abandonment by their mothers. With 
about two-thirds of the current cabinet from such a background, the political 
implications of this syndrome are huge – because it's the children inside the 
men running the country who are effectively in charge.

Boarding children invariably construct a survival personality that endures 
long after school and operates strategically. On rigid timetables, in 
rule-bound institutions, they must be ever alert to staying out of trouble. 
Crucially, they must not look unhappy, childish or foolish – in any way 
vulnerable – or they will be bullied by their peers. So they dissociate from 
all these qualities, project them out on to others, and develop duplicitous 
personalities that are on the run, which is why ex-boarders make the best spies.

Now attached to this internal structure instead of a parent, the boarding 
child survives, but takes into adulthood a permanent unconscious anxiety and 
will rarely develop what Daniel Goleman calls emotional intelligence. In 
adulthood he sticks to the same tactics: whenever he senses a threat of being 
made to look foolish, he will strike. We see this in Cameron's over-reaction to 
Angela Eagle MP, less than a year into his new job."Calm down, dear!" the PM 
patronisingly insisted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/apr/28/david-cameron-calm-down-dear>, 
as if she were the one upset and not he. The opposite benches loved it, of 
course, howling "Flashman!" (the public school bully from Tom Brown's 
Schooldays), but they never take on the cause of these leadership defects.

Bullying is inevitable and endemic in 24/7 institutions full of abandoned and 
frightened kids. Ex-boarders' partners often report that it ends up ruining 
home life, many years later. Bullying pervades British society, especially in 
politics and the media, but, like boarding, we normalise it. When, in 2011, 
Jeremy Clarkson ranted thathe would have striking public-sector workers shot 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/nov/30/jeremy-clarkson-one-show-apology>
, he was even defended by Cameron – it was apparently a bit of fun. No prizes 
for guessing where both men learned their styles. And no wonder that the House 
of Commons, with its adversarial architecture of Victorian Gothic – just like a 
public school chapel – runs on polarised debate and bullying.

Strategic survival has many styles: bullying is one; others include keeping 
your head down, becoming a charming bumbler, or keeping an incongruently 
unruffled smile in place, like health secretary Jeremy Hunt, former head boy at 
Charterhouse. Ina remarkable 1994 BBC documentary called The Making of Them 
<http://youtu.be/2uRr77vju8U>, whose title I borrowed for my first book, young 
boarders were discreetly filmed over their first few weeks at prep school. 
Viewers can witness the "strategic survival personality" in the process of 
being built. "Boarding school," says nine-year-old Freddy, puffing himself up, 
putting on his Very Serious Face and staring at the camera, "has changed me, 
and the one thing I can do now is get used [to it]". This false independence, 
this display of pseudo-adult seriousness is as evident in the theatrical 
concern of Cameron as it was in Tony Blair. It displays the strategic duplicity 
learned in childhood; it is hard to get rid of, and, disastrously, deceives 
even its creator.

The social privilege of boarding is psychologically double-edged: it both 
creates shame that prevents sufferers from acknowledging their problems, as 
well as unconscious entitlement that explains why ex-boarder leaders are 
brittle and defensive while still projecting confidence. Boris is so supremely 
confident that he needs neither surname nor adult haircut; he trusts his 
buffoonery to distract the public from what Conrad Black called "a sly fox 
disguised as a teddy bear". On the steps of St Paul's, Boris commanded the 
Occupy movement: "In the name of God and Mammon, go!" Was it a lark – Boris 
doing Monty Python? Or a coded message, announcing someone who, for 10 years, 
heard the King James Bible read in chapel at Eton? Those who don't recognise 
this language, it suggests, have no right to be here, so they should just clear 
off.

This anachronistic entitlement cannot easily be renounced: it compensates for 
years without love, touch or family, for a personality under stress, for the 
lack of emotional, relational and sexual maturation. In my new book,Wounded 
Leaders <http://www.woundedleaders.co.uk/>, I trace the history of British 
elitism and the negative attitude towards children to colonial times and what I 
call the "rational man project", whose Victorian boarding schools were 
industrial power stations churning out stoic, superior leaders for the empire.

Recent evidence from neuroscience experts shows what a poor training for 
leaderships this actually is. In short, you cannot make good decisions without 
emotional information (Professor Antonio Damasio); nor grow a flexible brain 
without good attachments (Dr Sue Gerhardt); nor interpret facial signals if 
your heart has had to close down (Professor Stephen Porges); nor see the big 
picture if your brain has been fed on a strict diet of rationality (Dr Iain 
McGilchrist). These factors underpin Will Hutton's view that"the political 
judgments of the Tory party have, over the centuries, been almost continuously 
wrong" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/11/will-hutton-david-cameron-wrong-on-europe>
.

With survival but not empathy on his school curriculum from age seven, Cameron 
is unlikely to make good decisions based on making relationships in Europe, as 
John Major could. He can talk of leading Europe, but not of belonging to it. 
Ex-boarder leaders cannot conceive of communal solutions, because they haven't 
had enough belonging at home to understand what it means. Instead, they are 
limited toesprit de corps with their own kind. In order to boost his standing 
with the rightwingers in his party, Cameron still thinks he can bully for 
concessions, make more supposedly "robust" vetos.

His European counterparts don't operate like this. Angela Merkel has held 
multiple fragile coalitions together through difficult times by means of her 
skill in relationships and collaboration. Though deadlocked at home, Barack 
Obama impressed both sides of British politics and in 2009 entered the hostile 
atmosphere of the Kremlin to befriend the then-president Dmitry Medvedev and 
make headway on a difficult disarmament treaty. In a subsequent meeting with 
the real power behind the throne, Obama invited Vladimir Putin to expound for 
an hour on what hadn't worked in recent Russian-American relationships, before 
responding. Despite their elitist education, and because of it, our own 
"wounded leaders" can't manage such statesmanship.

To change our politics, we'll have to change our education system. Today, most 
senior clinicians recognise boarding syndrome,several of whom recently signed a 
letter to the Observer calling for the end of early boarding 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/may/10/the-big-issue-boarding-schools-abuse>
. Its elitism ought to motivate the left. The Attlee government intended to 
disband the public schools, but not even Wilson's dared to. There's a cash 
problem: boarding is worth billions and has a massive lobby. Unlike most other 
European countries, our state does not contribute a per capita sum towards 
private education, so dismantling these schools, which still enjoy charitable 
status, would be costly. But can we really afford to sacrifice any more 
children for the sake of second-rate leadership?

Wounded Leaders: British Elitism and the Entitlement Illusion – a Psychohistory
 <http://woundedleaders.co.uk/> is published by Lone Arrow Press, £20
