
Oh man, I do not believe this. I am pregnant again. More to the point, I don't 
believe how far along I am (there is no phrase in English, by the way, to 
indicate one's progression through a pregnancy, that doesn't sound like 
19th-century agriculture). Twenty weeks.

The first I knew about it, I was in the gym, standing sideways next to a 
mirror, thinking, "That's funny, I look like a pregnant duck. No wonder I never 
come to the gym! This lighting makes me look like a pregnant duck." I went home 
and said to C, "Do you think I've put on weight?" He eyed me suspiciously. It 
is unlike me to ask him a question so direct, but it is not unusual for me to 
ask a question to which there is no correct answer, and then get incredibly 
angry. (Last time I was pregnant, I said: "Do you think men find obese women 
unattractive as a biological prophylactic against the time-waste of shagging 
someone who's already pregnant?") Back to my funny shape. "Since when?" he 
said. "Well ... how long have you been thinking I've put on weight?" (See how 
gracefully we circle each other, like the opening moves in kung fu.) "A couple 
of weeks?"

Now, the question that comes up at this juncture is, "Haven't women got some 
kind of lunar system that alerts them to this kind of thing?" and the short 
answer is, "No." Not since T was born have the moon and I been sending one 
another any kind of messages. The truth is I thought I was having an early 
menopause (I'm 35, it does happen ... I read it in the Daily Mail), and even 
though I have this craven urge to share almost every conversation I have with 
the widest possible audience, I don't have the backbone to tell anyone a real 
anxiety. The simplest conversation, with one friend or acquaintance or - heaven 
forfend - officer of the medical profession, would have yielded something like, 
"Oh, I never got my periods back either. That's how I ended up with my 
second/third/fourth child."

But even if I'd had that conversation, it's still impossible to keep two 
conflicting worries in your head at the same time. So I could have known 
rationally that I might be pregnant, but being in the grip of my phantom 
perimenopause, I still wouldn't have done anything sensible, such as taking a 
test.

So anyway, there I am, pregnant, and I go to the doctor, and explain the set 
of circumstances, including the bit about having no idea how far gone it is, 
and she says, "Oh God," which I am diverted to note is the stock response, from 
this point on, of everybody I talk to. The midwife practice, the scanning 
people, the other scanning people, I could write their script. It goes: "What 
was the date of your last period? Oh God."

This next bit is really only interesting if you are at 13 weeks and five days 
of your first pregnancy. It's an incredibly small readership sample, please 
skip it if you're not in it ...

Right, I've missed a lot of the important early-pregnancy stuff, I haven't 
been taking folic acid, I've been drinking, I even smoked a bit before 
Christmas (but, as C pointed out helpfully, "only when you were drunk"), and
I am also worried that I've missed the nucal fold test for Down's Syndrome (13 
weeks and six days), and some insane part of me, even though in the four days 
that have elapsed since gym-epiphany I can no longer even do my jeans up, 
thinks I might still be less than 14 weeks. After some ineffectual badgering 
from me, and a lot of "Oh God. Oh God, really?" from them, it became obvious 
that I wasn't going to get a quick dating scan at the hospital, possibly not 
even before I gave birth.

This story just gets more and more embarrassing. I went to one of those 
private clinics, where if you're lucky you see Charlotte Church (she had a scan 
every week of her first pregnancy; I think maybe she liked the smell of the 
ultrasound goo - and also she is incredibly rich). I am implacably opposed to 
private medicine, but the minute push comes to slightly harder push, here I am, 
in a low-lit waiting room with tasteful pregger-art 
(isn't-the-female-form-marvellous! bronzes) and eerily polite receptionists. No 
Charlotte Church, mind. It's possible that she's not even pregnant at the 
moment. Though not, if I've been reading Hello! with any diligence, very likely.

I will have to continue this next week.

