
Do you remember your 18th birthday? Was it a time of anticipation, excitement 
and joy? Your whole life ahead of you and so much to look forward to.

Not so much if you are an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child in the UK. You 
might have been here for a few years, done well in school, be happily settled 
with your wonderful foster parents – but your life is about to be turned upside 
down.

Your journey to the UK is likely to have been harsh, cruel and unforgiving. 
The country you left was at best impoverished; at worst, war-torn and dangerous.

Related: How English councils are supporting unaccompanied child asylum seekers
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/04/how-english-councils-are-supporting-unaccompanied-child-asylum-seekers>

But you made it here and we cared for you. Social workers, teachers and foster 
carers have helped you to recover from the trauma suffered. Unaccompanied 
asylum-seeking children (UASC) tend to learn English quickly, engage positively 
at school and many could go on to university if allowed.

However, your 18th birthday looms. You are about to stop being a vulnerable 
child deserving of our care and support and start being a statistic in our 
Alice in Wonderland immigration system.

The 2016 Immigration Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2016/19/contents/enacted/data.htm> seeks 
to: “Reduce pressures on local authorities and simplify support for migrants 
pending resolution of their immigration status or their departure from the UK.”

They have achieved the second part, because they have all but removed support 
for UASC who turn 18 while leaving local authorities in the invidious position 
whereby: “Local authorities will continue to provide support under section 17 
of theChildren <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> Act 1989 to meet 
any other needs of a child, or their family, in order to safeguard and promote 
the child’s welfare.”

You do not become less vulnerable by being 24 hours older

For this the Home Office will provide £200 per week – meant to cover 
everything – but not if the young person’s appeal rights to remain in the UK 
have been exhausted.

And here we get to the nub of the problem. Like so many political decisions 
this one is being made on the basis of how politicians wished the world was, 
rather than how it actually is. Our asylum application and removal and 
deportation services don’t work very well. This isn’t a political point: Labour 
have been just as inept as the Tories on this.

As they approach their 18th birthday, unaccompanied asylum-seeking children 
must apply for extended leave to remain in the UK, and the majority are turned 
down. However, the Home Office does not then remove them from the UK. The 
appeals system is byzantine and inefficient. Many young people go off grid and 
become more vulnerable. Often the Home Office have no idea where they are or 
how many of them there are. The removals system is inefficient, under resourced 
and overwhelmed.

You do not become less vulnerable by being 24 hours older. It beggars belief 
that while weallow foster children to stay put until 21 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/oct/08/foster-carers-staying-put-underfunding>
, we are deliberately sabotaging good work undertaken with unaccompanied 
children by removing support at a critical juncture.

At a meeting last week, I asked the immigration minister James Brokenshire if 
it would not be simpler and more humane to offer the same leaving care support 
to unaccompanied children as to other care leavers. His answer was that this 
would “not be appropriate as we are not preparing them for adult life in the UK 
so the approach must be different”.

This is as casually callous as it is nonsensical. Is he seriously suggesting 
that allowing an unaccompanied child to stay in their foster home until 21 and 
attend further education college or university (for however short a time) is a 
worse preparation for returning to their country of origin than being made 
functionally destitute? Or maybe he just accepts that destitution is what we 
are sending the young person back to?

Our whole approach to UASC is confused, grudging and wrong. It seems there has 
been a very cynical political calculation made that we can’t deport children so 
must be seen to be caring and magnanimous but, at 18, all bets are off.

Related: Social workers' response to Europe's refugee crisis a testament to 
human hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/23/refugee-crisis-europe-austria-social-work>

The only reasonable approach to returning UASC to countries of origin is to do 
it soon after they arrive in the UK. This would be after a proper best 
interests determination by a family court which has also been given control 
over the immigration decision. If a young person has a viable situation to 
return to in their country of origin, or with a relative in another country, 
then that can be pursued. If not then the local authority should take a care 
order and the young person be given permanent leave to remain.

The Home Office will howl that this will encourage more children to travel to 
the UK. This totally misunderstands why children travel; it is often to escape 
an existential threat. We live in a dangerous, desperately unequal and 
uncertain world. Our corner of it is safe, prosperous and, despite the best 
efforts of successive home secretaries, tolerant and welcoming. This is why 
children travel, not because of this benefit or that service.

Local authorities that support UASC are already worried about the impacts of 
removing services. There are conflicts between the Immigration Act and local 
authorities’ statutory obligations, and the added cost implication if they do 
have to provide some form of support. The constant threat of judicial review 
which almost always proves a lengthy and expensive way of dealing with 
inequitable policy is very much present.

Today, in the Lords, The Adolescent and Children’s Trust – the charity where I 
am chief executive – will try to undo the damage done to vulnerable 
unaccompanied and refugee children who turn 18. We are introducing an amendment 
to the children and social work bill to give unaccompanied young people the 
same access to leaving care services, university and further education and 
training as all other care leavers until they leave the UK.

These are our children. Every child leaving care matters and we must not let 
the government divide up care leavers into the deserving and undeserving for 
narrow and cynical political ends.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
