
What an incredibly touchy age ours is! Last week I wrote, "The Romans make 
Stalin look like a new ager." So, of course, I get complaints from Rome. "How 
dare you insult Rome!" begins one, but, of course, in Italian, because the 
writer is obviously a big elitist, showing off the fact that she can speak 
Italian. "And who was Stalin, anyway? I am only six, and we are too poor for 
books and I know nothing about history. Was Stalin in the Beatles? Or was that 
Groucho Marx?" She goes on to explain that Rome is entirely different now - no 
togas, no orgies, no licentiousness. (Note to self: avoid Rome.)

Of course I also get letters from Russians, defending Stalin. "Stalin does 
nyet look like new ager, nyet way," wrote one reader, rather predictably named 
Boris. "He is big strong man. Could crush likes of you. Did not have crystal. 
Did not burn incense. Only burned decadent kulaks and enemies of people."

Then, in the coup de grace, who should complain but Stalin himself. I'm 
sitting there watching Lost, when suddenly, the ghost of Koba the Dread is 
looking covetously at my popcorn. "I just made enough for me," I said, guessing 
his intention. "Plus your hands look dirty."

"Okey-dokey," he said, in heavily accented English. "And for record? This is 
pure Russian soil of people."

I mentally reviewed his statistics: 20 million killed, including nearly 15 
million starved to death and a million executed. "I have bone to pick with 
you," he said, darkly. Was I scared? No. I could see right through him. 
Literally. He was incorporeal. When, experimentally, I dropped a piece of 
popcorn in his lap, it went right through, and he reached through his own 
transparent groin to get it, but no luck, as the popcorn had physical substance 
and Mr Tough Guy didn't.

"You wrote bad thing," he said. "I'm even more meaner than Romans. Is not nice 
to say. I am number one mean guy. You hurt my feeling."

"Are you in hell?" I said.

Stalin looked around my house. "Well, is not number-one best," he said. "Why 
you paint wall that colour? Is very poshlust."

"Is there punishment beyond the grave for the outrages against decency you 
committed in life?" I asked.

He craftily answered with a question. "What this show is about? Why is all the 
ladies so good-looking?" Then, as if hearing a demonic voice from far away, 
summoning him back to an eternity of remorse, Stalin cast a baleful look at my 
popcorn and the ladies of Lost, and faded away.

Lucky for him. We have a strict policy in our house: no one can talk during 
Lost, not even terrifying, ghostly mass murderers.
