
What will I learn?
Fancy becoming the next Zaha Hadid or Daniel Libeskind? No? Well, that's OK, 
because the beauty of becoming an architect is that you'll be able to use your 
imagination to create the sorts of buildings you'd want to live, work or play 
in.

But it comes at a price - about five years of study and a couple of years of 
professional practice experience. Part of the reason for the long academic road 
is that your degree will touch on a wide range of subjects, including history, 
law, IT, technology and management, as well as a hefty design element.

You'll also be better placed to understand what politicians mean when
they talk about renewal and regeneration, as you'll be exploring housing 
design and urban planning, and looking at how communities are shaped and 
developed. Your understanding of the construction industry should improve too. 
Some courses actually offer a combined architecture and planning course.

A flair for geometry and three-dimensional form will be an advantage, but 
maths and physics A-levels are not prerequisites for a degree in architecture.

Time should be set aside on the course for work experience in an architectural 
firm. If not, it's vital you spend some of your holidays seeing how things are 
done.

What skills will I gain?
Your awareness of design and your practical abilities will leave you suitably 
equipped to tackle the placements, the rigorous study and the final exams that 
will qualify you to become a bona fide architect.

You'll be able to demonstrate an eye for detail and have developed a deeper 
appreciation for what can be done with some bricks and mortar.

You should have learned the history of the profession and be able to discuss 
trends in design, as well as form your own opinions of what worked and what did 
not.

Practical experience will not only allow you to put your theoretical skills to 
the test, it will also help develop your communication skills - vital if you 
want to sell an innovative design to sceptical town planners or the public.

What job can I get?
A degree in architecture will set you up to become a registered architect, 
which, as mentioned before, is not a short or easy route to take. But if after 
a degree you don't fancy the continued slog, you could put what you've learned 
to good use in local or national town and country planning departments, in 
other areas of the construction industry, or in the conservation and 
environmental sector.

What will look good on my CV?
· The ability to conceptualise and develop the design of three-dimensional 
objects and spaces.
· The ability to research and respond to briefs.
· The ability to form considered judgments in developing sustainable design.

For the full range of skills you can develop through a degree in architecture 
clickhere 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Education/documents/2007/04/17/Architecture.pdf>
 (pdf).
