
This is the time of year in which the hazel yields its greatest gift: its 
hazelnuts. My eldest daughter Benny and I have already seen quite a few hollow 
shells on the ground and realise we need to harvest now if we're to beat the 
squirrels. We spend a blissful hour in the autumn sun standing beneath the 
branches on the fringes of the wood, looking upwards for those familiar 
clusters in their green caps. (The hazel, I'm told, gets its name from the 
Anglo-Saxonhaesel, meaning cap.)

Always a bit of a bruiser, Benny gleefully pulls down the branches with a long 
stick and yanks off the nuts. Doubles and trebles are most common, but 
occasionally there is a foursome. We compete to see who can spot the largest 
clusters.

Since the drastic decline in the craft of coppicing, the hazel (Corylus 
avellana) has become rather a forgotten tree. It used to be a vital part of the 
woodland economy, coppiced to make baskets and hurdles, thatching spars and 
sticks, charcoal and fagots. Now it's overgrown and overlooked. It's more a 
shrub than a tree and it has none of the magnificence of an elderly oak or a 
sturdy beech. And yet hazel was, for the ancients, one of the most important 
trees, thought to promote healing and wisdom.

The most famous legend about the hazel, from Irish folklore, happens at 
Connla's well. Connla's well contained the salmon of wisdom, and the salmon was 
wise because its well was surrounded by nine hazels that dropped their nuts 
into the water. My favourite version of the legend concerns a master who wanted 
to eat the fish to gain its knowledge. He ordered his pupil Fionn to cook the 
fish but not taste it. Fionn burnt his thumb while cooking it and put it in his 
mouth for relief. So he received the fish's wisdom instead of his master.

I love all the lore about the tree: that carrying a double hazelnut in your 
pocket prevents toothache; that hazel twigs used for divining should be cut on 
Midsummer's Eve; that hazel twigs entwined in a horse's harness would keep it 
from being enchanted by the fairies; and that the tree's catkins (or lambs' 
tails) were positioned around the kitchen fireplace at lambing time to help 
with the births. Both Mercury and his Greek counterpart Hermes had staffs of 
hazel (forming the caduceus) and pilgrims were often buried with their hazel 
staffs.

Within an hour Benny and I have harvested almost a kilo of nuts. We proudly 
show everyone our collection. Benny enjoys the noisy revelation of cracking 
them open, while I put my hands around the shells to stop them ricocheting 
around the kitchen. Once open, some yield huge, pointy nuts, more milky and 
soft than you're used to. Others have only a tiny white drop in them, as if the 
nut never quite knew it was supposed to grow.

We find a recipe for hazelnut bread and send my youngest daughter Emma out to 
get an egg from the chickens while we reduce the nuts to a creamy dust and mix 
them with self-raising flour; then we add salt, sugar and the egg, beaten in 
milk. We chuck it in the oven and wait an hour.

Probably because of the egg and sugar it tastes more like cake than bread. We 
offer it to the sophisticated Italian palate of my wife, whose judgement is 
"er, nutty" and "insipido" (the much- repeated Italian term meaning "not enough 
salt"). "But," asks Benny, who has an allergy to nuts and thinks she's missing 
out on their mystical properties, "do you feel any wiser?"


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobiasjones 
<http://theguardian.com/profile/tobiasjones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
