
It’s likely to be the greatest academic challenge you’ll face as a student. 
Speak to a finalist working in the library at the moment and you’ll see from 
their gaunt and despairing facial expression that writing a thesis is not a fun 
thing to do.

Sure, it’s an opportunity to indulge your interests and spread your wings 
intellectually. You’ll feel a marathon runner’s pride as you hand over that wad 
of freshly-bound A4. But it will have taken its toll.

These students take us through their hair-raising experiences - and share 
their tips for success.

I got the flu, and had to pull three all-nighters in a row

The dissertation was “a long, arduous process” for William Lloyd, a recent 
journalism graduate at Kingston University. “I caught the flu for the second 
time in my life, a week before it was due. That wasn’t ideal because I’d not 
really organised my time properly.


“True to form, I had left half of it to write with a few days left. I got a 
small extension due to the illness but had travel back to uni from home and do 
three all-nighters in a row at the library in order to get it done. Bloody 
hell, it took its toll.

“Whatever happens, my advice is not to panic. It was quite fun, in a way.”

My supervisor told me I was ‘not a scholar’

Cat Soave, a recent English literature graduate from the University of York, 
says: “I immediately encountered problems with my dissertation supervisor. They 
decided that I couldn’t write about the topic I had spent three years of 
education working up to. Their rationale was that I was “not a scholar” and 
would be unable to do adequate research for my topic.


“I was incredibly disappointed, and had to begin my research from scratch. In 
later meetings, I didn’t feel confident enough to be very vocal for fear of 
further criticism. I ended up completing my dissertation with next to no help 
or direction.”

What can we draw from Cat’s experience? It’s important to build a good 
relationship with your supervisor or try to find a different one if it clearly 
isn’t going to work.

Related: Ten things I wish I'd known before starting my dissertation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2012/may/02/dissertation-top-ten-tips>

Avoid unnecessary tinkering

Alys Key, a third-year English literature and language student at the 
University of Oxford, says: “The biggest problem I had with my dissertation was 
the final stages of drafting. The more I read it, the more it seemed to have 
problems, even if I’d been happier at an earlier stage.

“I think the key is to set yourself a cut-off point, at least a day or two 
before the deadline, and just limit yourself to proofreading. Everything seems 
bad when you’ve read it 100 times, so you have to have a bit of faith.”

I should have looked for more interesting research material

“Looking back, I should have researched more broadly,” says Emma Guest, an 
English literature and film studies graduate from Worcester University.

“I wrote my dissertation on two films by Guillermo del Toro. When I was 
looking for secondary reading to support my essay, I mainly focused on finding 
books on the topic. I think some people don’t realise that there are more 
interesting forms of secondary reading out there – such as archived papers, 
documentaries, and so on.”

Different tutors wanted different things - and some didn’t care

For Rupert McCallum, 21, a third-year biological sciences student at the 
University of Portsmouth, formatting his essay became an obstacle. “Different 
tutors within the department wanted different things - and some didn’t care,” 
he says.

“My advice would be to read up early on how to format your essay in case it 
becomes a pain closer to the deadline. Then double check, especially if the 
department is sending mixed messages. Although some of it may seem silly, 
sometimes it’s best just to jump through the hoops.”

Whatever happens, my advice is not to panic.
William Lloyd 
I found it was easy to get sidetracked

Jessica Shales studied Anglo Saxon, Norse, and Celtic at the University of 
Cambridge – a specialist subject that can be difficult to research. “I found it 
was quite easy to become sidetracked, and to start reading lots in detail about 
stuff that wasn’t directly related to my question. If I were to start again, I 
think I would want to keep my overall aim more clearly in mind,” she says.

“I would also start writing it later than I did. I think I panicked a bit and 
wanted to get something down on paper, and so my argument wasn’t properly 
formed when I started writing. I think I was a bit scared by the fact that the 
dissertation was longer than anything I’d written before.

“I suppose my advice is to do whatever you’d try to do in a shorter essay, 
which is to pose a question, use relevant evidence to discuss it, and arrive at 
a conclusion accordingly.”

Related: Is your dissertation weirder than mine? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2012/oct/10/students-is-your-dissertation-weird>

There’s nothing quite so soul-destroying as losing a page reference

Kate Wallis, 21, who studies arts and siences at University College London 
(UCL), learned the hard way to reference as she went along. “And I mean really 
reference, with page numbers. I cannot emphasise this enough.

“There’s nothing quite so soul-destroying as a stack of 20 books next to you 
that you have to go through to work out which elusive page your trifling 
statistic came from,” she says. “It’s advice that probably applies to all essay 
writing , but the dissertation is where it really comes to the fore.”

Top tip: don’t drink and dissertate


Don’t follow the example of William Buck, 21, who studied history at Cardiff 
University. “A desire to be in the pub let me down a bit. I was out at a night 
club about five times a week,” he says.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
