
“I wanna know what love is,” the song goes, and I think: yeah, me too. In 
2015, 15% of Americans used an online dating service; if you are abutcher 
<http://www.farmersonly.com/> or baker <http://www.glutenfreesingles.com/> or 
candlestick maker <http://www.amishdating.com/>, there’s an app for you. Our 
modern dating industry is built on the idea that you are too much of a dummy to 
find love yourself, and it is now worth $2.4bn.

The latest startup in this space is Instant Chemistry 
<http://instantchemistry.com/>, a company built on the premise that your DNA 
could help you figure out who to love. Last month, I met co-founders Sara 
Seabrooke and her husband Ron Gonzalez at a nondescript laboratory in Toronto, 
surrounded by vials of spit.


Instant Chemistry works like so: you and your partner sign up to receive a 
“relationship kit” containing two saliva receptacles, which you spit into and 
send back to the company. Instant Chemistry then extracts certain genetic 
information from the samples and, based on what they term “bio- and 
neuro-compatibility”, score how compatible you are. Seabrooke and Gonzalez, for 
example, ring in at a cool 86%.

Instant Chemistry only looks at select genetic material: it won’t map your 
genome, or tell you about mutations that could affect your offspring (to do so, 
they’d be diving into murky ethical waters andopening themselves up to the same 
scrutiny 
<http://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2015/03/02/23andme-and-the-promise-of-anonymous-genetic-testing-10/23andmes-dangerous-business-model-17>
 facing the genomics company23andMe <https://www.23andme.com/>).

In the process of analysis, first, they look at the genes of your immune 
system – the Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) profile of you and your partner. HLA 
is what allows us to recognize the self: is this body mine or other? It 
controls what bacteria grows on and in you, producing your unique odor and 
taste, leaving you unbothered by your partner’s early-morning scent, their 
tongue, hair and hollows. As Gonzalez says, “How often have you heard something 
like, ‘I liked him, he was cute, but we didn’t have any chemistry.’ That’s not 
magic, that’s science.”

How often have you heard someone say ‘I liked him, but we didn’t have any 
chemistry.’ That’s not magic, that’s science.
Ron Gonzalez 
HLA is the best studied of all of Instant Chemistry’s metrics: the others rely 
on extrapolating psychological profiles from four behavioral genetic variants: 
your serotonin transporter, oxytocin receptor, dopamine receptor, and a 
dopamine enzyme. Seabrooke and Gonzalez argue that individual variations of 
these genes can determine how you communicate and process emotions, and 
subsequently how you and your partner will grow as a couple over time.

If you think this sounds bananas, you’re not alone. I emailed a few 
geneticists for commentary on the veracity of Instant Chemistry’s science, and 
received the following response: “I spent three minutes reading what this 
company is offering, and my impression is it is total delusion. I really cannot 
waste more time on this.” But Seabrooke and Gonzalez aren’t hacks – they met as 
medical students studying neuroscience and genetics. They were both fascinated 
by the science of compatibility and spent years trying to figure out why some 
people work well together, and other just don’t.

After you take Instant Chemistry’s test, you and your partner will receive a 
booklet explaining the findings. You’ll learn how likely it is that you and 
your partner will remain physically attracted to each other over time and 
you’ll get feedback from the resident good doctors on how to be a better 
listener. The total cost for the test and subsequent “love manual” is $199.

It’s not cheap. Instant Chemistry is banking on the fact that most of us would 
answer the question: “So you really want to know how truly compatible you and 
your partner are?” with a Yes! Desperately!

It’s an intoxicating idea, but currently only about 300 couples have signed 
up, which means they can’t draw robust conclusions about their compatibility 
science – at least not yet. While two of their subjects are now engaged, 
Seabrooke points out that most couples who take the test are already fairly 
established. They want their scores, it seems, to affirm what they believe they 
already know. And they’ve only found one unicorn, that elusive couple with a 
perfect score. “There just aren’t that many super couples,” says Gonzalez. Most 
couples are “average” – it’s an arbitrary scale, but scores usually fall in the 
70-75% range.

In other words: love is, for most of us, almost tragically average.

With that in mind, my boyfriend, a good sport, agreed to take the test. First 
we provided our spit and then a few days later we took the psychological test 
component, something like a personality quiz. “When watching a movie, do you 
move closer to your partner to touch their hand or shoulder?” the machine 
asked, and Yes, I answered (though we had been arguing all morning and were now 
sitting on opposite ends of the couch).

“We don’t have to break up!” I emailed him when we get our results: 74% 
compatible, a healthy, if not magical, score. I hoped for more, somehow. I 
wanted some kind of guarantee. Our biocompatibility was strong, but the “love 
manual” told us we are both “worriers”, our muddling, lazy dopamine enzymes 
made us less resilient to stress. Maybe this will teach us to be more careful 
with each other. Maybe it won’t.


Seabrooke is working on a rapid blood test for instantaneous HLA results, and 
they imagine an app that would geolocate singles based on high biological 
compatibility. I wonder if we could take it further: might it someday be 
possible to find or even design a partner solely through DNA? Seabrooke, 
smiling, shakes her head. We are a combination of nature and nurture, she 
explains, and genes will never be the sole answer.

But Gonzalez interrupts. “I’ll push back a little on that. There’s always that 
component of love that is random, but there is a huge subconscious area of 
scientific compatibility that is occurring under the surface. A lot of that is 
biological. That is the thing that drives me nuts. People think of love as a 
conscious thing, and it’s not. So much of it you have no control over. You’re 
just along for the ride.”
