
The summer of 2011 was memorable for the most intensive job search I have ever 
undertaken. I needed to find an internship placement for a master’s in 
development studies from Uppsala University in Sweden.

Like most prospective interns who don’t have a trust fund, I researched paid 
internships. Out of 51 applications, I secured an unpaid internship with Unicef 
in New York and a paid internship with the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) in Lithuania. I chose the unpaid internship because I wanted to 
experience life in the Big Apple and see how international affairs across the 
world operate from New York.

My parents and friends were concerned about how I could live in the city on a 
full-time unpaid internship. They asked how I was going to be a productive 
intern if I had to skip lunch because I couldn’t afford to eat? How could I 
afford the rent?

You do not necessarily need to endure hardship in an unpaid internship for a 
reputable international development career

It was a difficult time financially. I had to dip into my meagre savings from 
my previous consultancies. Thankfully I had a place to stay with a friend but I 
imagine that I was a burden. And despite the financial difficulty, the 
internship was worth it, partly in terms of the lessons learned.

One valuable observation I made as an intern interacting with my superiors at 
Unicef and acquaintances from other UN agencies was that most did not start 
their careers as interns. In fact, some entered the field of international 
development not from the global arena but from local or national institutions 
ranging from grassroots NGOs to a government ministry. The lesson I learned 
was: with focus and determination, a paid internship at the local level or in a 
developing country can also expose you to what is popularly known as 
“field-based expertise” which makes you desirable for future international 
assignments. You do not necessarily need to endure hardship in an unpaid 
internship to have a reputable international development career.

Related: Interning at the UN: why I left my family for New York City 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/08/un-women-internship-new-york>

I was fortunate enough to be offered a paid job at Unicef after my internship. 
But I believe my grassroots experience in my home country, Ghana, made me stand 
out from other candidates, not my placement at the UN. Practical experiences 
provide context and meaning to development issues. This became useful in my 
assignments at various UN agencies in New York where one could be overwhelmed 
by the detail of negotiations or universalist notions of development.

I’ve often wondered, what if I did not have a social network of friends to 
count on for support in New York? Perhaps that would have hindered my ambition 
of a UN career. We recently heard the news of22-year-old New Zealander David 
Hyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/12/unpaid-un-intern-who-had-to-sleep-in-a-tent-quits-after-media-uproar>
 who lived in a tent because he couldn’t afford the rent in Geneva during an 
unpaid internship with the UN.

When internships are open only for those who can cover their own cost, only 
people from wealthy countries take them. The first challenge for a prospective 
intern is to secure travel funds, which in most cases is impossible for a 
graduate student, especially from Africa. I believe this creates a double 
disadvantage for developing country nationals who can’t even intern with the UN 
in their own countries because developed-country nationals can easily afford to 
live there. This situation reinforces under-representation and exclusion of 
developing country nationals.

UN regional offices in developing countries should give priority to local 
people so they don’t end up having to secure funds for traveling abroad. It was 
even difficult for me to intern in my home country because most interns at the 
UN in Ghana were often nationals from developed countries.

Related: How can the UN fight inequality when it doesn’t pay its interns? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/03/how-can-the-un-fight-inequality-when-it-doesnt-pay-its-interns>

In my opinion, there are four main ideas to be considered by prospective UN 
interns and the UN internship programmes respectively.

Firstly, seek honest opinions from former UN interns on their work experiences 
and the worth of an unpaid internship.

Second, if a prospective intern’s goal is to gain a UN-oriented 
development/humanitarian experience, then a UN or a specialist agency’s 
internship can absolutely positive. However, if the aim is to gain broader 
development/humanitarian experience, then it could be worth interning in 
several other options than an unpaid UN internship.

Third, to help prospective interns make an informed decision, it is important 
for the UN and its agencies to organise open days, both physical and virtual 
events, to clarify expectations about internships.

Related: 12 tips for getting a job in international development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/aug/26/international-development-career-advice-tips>

Fourth, perhaps one soft approach to mitigating the cost of internship on 
interns could be to offer some financial and/or other benefits such as a 
stipend, medical insurance or a free lunch.

It is commendable that at least some UN agencies such as the International 
Labour Organization does offer paid internships – at least this shows that 
addressing this situation is not an impossible endeavour.

Michael Boampong is a PhD candidate and tutor at Birkbeck, University of 
London. He has worked for many UN agencies as consultant focusing on migration 
and youth development. Follow@mickay360  <https://twitter.com/mickay360>on 
Twitter.

Are you a student or recent graduate who undertook a global development or 
global health-related internship or work experience placement in 2014 or 2015? 
What was your experience? Send your stories toglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> with ‘internship’ in the subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
