
Ocean View House An Bang Village, Hoi An, Vietnam

Good for aspiring boat captains
Sleeps 6
Cost from £973 a week including breakfast

A few miles from the souvenir shop-lined streets of Unesco-listed Hoi An is An 
Bang, where the sandy shore is dotted with thung chai, traditional bamboo 
basket boats. Rise before dawn and you'll see An Bang's fishermen amid a 
mountain of nets as they paddle out to sea.

In the village, sandy paths lead between nine whitewashed houses run by a 
local couple (who can arrange for you try your hand at sailing a basket boat). 
Ocean View House (comprising adjoining buildings called Ocean Dream and Ocean 
Breeze, which can be rented separately or together) is the closest one to the 
sea. Only a lawn scattered with sun loungers and umbrellas separates the shaded 
patios from the sand.

Light-filled, air-conditioned rooms are whitewashed with turquoise accents, 
and sparsely furnished (there's a fridge, but no kitchen). Breakfast is 
included and a local chef can cook other meals, or you can use the communal 
outdoor kitchen 50m away down a sandy track.

There's a fish market nearby, or you can ride the free bikes or hire a taxi to 
go into Hoi An for superb restaurants and street food stalls. Closer are 
a handful of simple beachside eateries, sublime spots for sundowners.
• +84 90 666 0309, anbangseasidevillage.com 
<http://www.anbangseasidevillage.com/new-ocean-view-suite-and-deluxe/>

The Boathouse, Mui Ne, Vietnam
 The Boathouse Mui Ne 
Good for luxury lovers
Sleeps 8
Cost from £2,077 a week

This must be one of the country's most magnificent beach properties, slap-bang 
on the area's best beach, which is great for young kids. You'll pay a premium 
for the privilege of staying here, but at least the living is cheap – the 
Boathouse is right next to a fishing village, so you can buy seafood from the 
fisherman who ply their round basket boats around the bay. It comes with two 
motorbikes, a couple of staff and stacks of space – all done out in a rather 
tasteful if incongrous urbane style.
• No phone, flipkey.com/mui-ne-villa-rentals/p614930 
<http://www.flipkey.com/mui-ne-villa-rentals/p614930/>

The Waterhouse, Koh Yao Noi, Thailand
 Outside the waterhouse, Koh Yao Noi, Thailand 
Good for water babies
Sleeps six
Cost from £284 a week

A soothing soundtrack of bobbing fishing boats, panoramic sea vistas, and 
sublime sunsets are in store at this over-water holiday house on one of 
Thailand's unspoiled islands, Koh Yao Noi or Little Long Island. Located midway 
between Phuket and Krabi, and accessible by boat from both, the traditional 
timber stilted house is typical of the architecture of the Muslim south. Low 
tide reveals mud flats, but it's a short amble to a fine swimming beach.
• No phone, khaodham.com/listings/waterhouse 
<http://www.khaodham.com/listings/waterhouse/>

Baan Nam, Koh Phangan, Thailand

Good for peace seekers
Sleeps 4
Cost from £254 a week

Thailand's Koh Phangan, near Koh Samui, is best-known for booze-fuelled 
full-moon parties, but the more serene north-east has isolated sandy beaches 
such as Tong Nai Pan Noi, with a mellower vibe and good diving. On a hill above 
the beach, accessible by a walking track, this traditional wooden house in 
tropical gardens has polished floorboards, rattan walls, a decent kitchen, and 
a deck with sofa, table and chairs overlooking the sea.
• No phone, holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/thong-nai-pan/256944 
<http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/thong-nai-pan/256944>

Donna Beach House, Koh Samui, Thailand

Good for sunset lovers
Sleeps 4
Cost from £553 a week

On the south-western side of the island, Nathon, Koh Samui's capital, is a 
real town used by locals rather than a tourist resort. Just north of it is this 
big timber house set slightly back from the beach. There's a deck ideal for 
meals outside, and another table inside by the sleek modern kitchen. The deck 
is where you'll want to be for sunset, which the locals claim is the most 
spectacular on Samui.
• No phone, airbnb.com/rooms/1446549 <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/1446549>

Villa Romonea, Kep, Cambodia

Good for architecture buffs
Sleeps 12
Cost from £1,800 a week

Beloved by locals for its spectacular sunsets and fantastic crab market, 
Kep lies on the loveliest part of Cambodia's southern coast, close to colonial 
Kampot. curvaceous whitewashed Villa Romonea has a striking swimming pool and 
lawns sprawling to the sea. The modernist villa, designed by architect Lu Ban 
Hap in the 1960s, has contemporary interiors, an enormous kitchen, a chef on 
hand, and affordable seafood restaurants nearby. Activities include kayaking, 
windsurfing, trekking, cycling, and boat trips to Rabbit Island.
• +855 12 879 486, villaromonea.com <http://www.villaromonea.com/> 

Beachfront property, Boracay, Philippines

Good for wave riders and wind lovers
Sleeps 7
 Cost from £406 a week

Listen to waves crashing against the shore from your bed in this light-filled, 
contemporary, two-storey house slap-bang on Bulabog beach, Borocay island. 
Though in the path of typhoon Haiyan, the island was relatively unscathed and 
the palm-lined beach was soon cleaned up. Upstairs is a sun terrace and 
recliners overlooking the turquoise sea. The downstairs has its own entrance 
and kitchenette. Bulabog is a kiteboarding and windsurfing centre.
• No phone, flipkey.com/boracay-vacation-rentals/p422930/ 
<http://www.flipkey.com/boracay-vacation-rentals/p422930/>

Anak's Cottage, Gili Islands, Indonesia

Good for barefoot idlers
Sleeps 6
Cost from £640 a week

You'll be barefoot for the duration of your stay at delightful Anak's Cottage, 
in a sandy coconut grove a short amble from a gob-smacking beach on 
vehicle-free Gili Trawangan. These blue-and-white thatched cottages with 
balconies are decorated with idiosyncratic touches such as an upended boat as 
shelves, but plenty of outdoor furniture and an alfresco kitchen make it hard 
to resist dining with your toes in the sand. Diving, snorkeling, surfing and 
boat trips are on offer but most guests do very little.
• No phone, anakgili.com <http://www.anakgili.com>

Pirate Beach House, Jalan Tejakula, Bali, Indonesia

Good for would-be Jack Sparrows
Sleeps 4 adults and 4 children
Cost from £609 a week

In a fishing village on the quieter north-eastern coast of Bali, this 
traditional teak house has an idyllic palm garden, with the sea out front and 
jungle behind. Fondly called Pirate Beach House by its owners, because "there's 
plenty of bounty to be had", it's a real treasure. It has its original roof and 
walls – from 1925 – and shady verandas. There are two en suite doubles, with a 
bunk bed room for children behind each. Another gem is the caretaker, who will 
take you out fishing or catch fish for you.
• No phone, roomorama.com/rooms/111212 <https://www.roomorama.com/rooms/111212>

Warung Deeksha, Bingin, Bali, Indonesia 
 Warung Deeksha, Bingin, Bali, Indonesia Photograph: Airbnb 
Good for surfers or loafers
Sleeps 6
Cost from £595 a week

The Brazilian owner of this light-filled house above the sand called it Warung 
Deeksha when he built it in 2008. A warung is a family-owned business and 
deeksha means blessing. Surfers will enjoy watching the Bingin and Impossibles 
beach breaks from the comfort of bed, while other guests may be satisfied with 
the panoramic sea views. There are large outdoor decks and foldable doors that 
open the place to the elements. It's accessed by 108 steps, so if you weren't 
fit when you arrive, you will be when you leave.
• No phone, airbnb.co.uk/rooms/52613 <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/52613>

Villa Gamrang, West Java, Indonesia

Best for extended families
Sleeps 16
Cost from £744 a week

There's an inviting jade-tiled pool, matching the colour of the ocean below at 
this sprawling hilltop villa, and timber decks and stone terraces with sea 
views if you're too lazy to trot down to the sand. The property has spacious 
living areas, a brilliant kitchen, and multiple bathrooms, making it ideal for 
big families or groups. It's near the village of Cisolok, four hours from 
Jakarta, and activities include hiking, birdwatching, surfing, diving and 
fishing from one of the colourful boats you'll see from the house.
• No phone, villa-gamrang.nl <http://www.villa-gamrang.nl/>

Tropical Beach House, Hikkaduwa, Sri Lanka

Best for: beachcombers
Sleeps 6
Cost from £903 a week

Step out of the gate and you're on the sand.Snorkel, swim, surf, fish, or 
beachcomb by day, and after dark sit around a fire, feasting on a seafood 
barbecue or, if you're lucky, watching turtles come ashore to lay eggs. The 
whitewashed bungalow is decorated in typical Sri Lankan style with furniture 
made from heavy wood, rattan and bamboo, and there are four-poster beds with 
mosquito nets. There's a tiled balcony upstairs, a terrace downstairs, and a 
separate cabana in an adjoining garden.
• No phone, tropicalbeachhouse.com <http://www.tropicalbeachhouse.com/>

House by the Sea, near Matara, Sri Lanka

Best for history lovers 
Sleeps 10
Cost from £580 a week
Matara is the last stop on the railway line, and the train is a romantic way 
to arrive in this historically rich area, once occupied by Arabs, Portuguese, 
Dutch and English, although it's the beaches most people come for. Made for big 
groups, this rustic beachfront house has an abundance of low-slung chairs, 
recliners, swinging beds, and tables scattered around breezy terraces and on 
the expansive lawns of the shady palm garden. There's a barbecue, well-equipped 
kitchen, bikes and a boat if you want to fish for your supper.
• No phone, deepbluesrilankarentals.com 
<http://www.deepbluesrilankarentals.com>

Pavilion, Kovalam, Kerala, India

Best for sundowner-sipping couples 
Sleeps 8
Cost from £700 a week (£350 for one floor)

Sink into the cane chairs on the marble balconies in the evenings to sip cold 
beers and enjoy the cool breeze as you gaze at the Arabian Sea. In a coconut 
grove overlooking Samudra beach, the two-storey property is split into two 
apartments with spacious rooms and decent kitchens, which can be rented 
separately or together. Kovalam's cream sand beaches are the main attraction 
(the famous Lighthouse beach is nearby), and Kerala's tranquil backwaters are 
two hours away.
• No phone, ownersdirect.co.uk <http://www.ownersdirect.co.uk/india/IN154.htm>

Ashram Beach Villa, Mermaid Eco Resort, Cox's Bazar, Bangladesh

Best for beach barbecue-lovers 
Sleeps 4
Cost from £550 a week

Within splashing distance of the sea, Ashram Beach Villas are set within 
a larger eco-resort at Cox's Bazar beach. Arrival is by boat, hammocks are 
strung about the place, and there's a day bed with cushions right on the sand. 
A local family takes care of the area, fishing from the beach, and can cook up 
their daily catch for you. Or you can use the fishing gear provided and fix 
your own barbecue.
• +88 0184 1416 4649, mermaidecoresort.com 
<http://mermaidecoresort.com/site/category_details/5>

Due Palme, Keyodhoo Island, Maldives

Best for honeymooners on a budget 
Sleeps 4
Cost from £600 a week, with full board, transfers and excursions

Painted in ice-cream colours, with fishing nets on their walls, these 
family-owned houses are worlds away from the over-water bungalows of the posh 
resorts. They're not on the beach but your door opens on to sand and the 
crystal-clear sea is a short walk away. The price includes speedboat transfers 
from Malé, a Maldivian guide, all meals, and excursions to other islands for 
fishing, swimming and snorkelling.
• maldivealternative.com <http://maldivealternative.com>
