
When tensions in my foster home reached new heights, it was time to leave. And 
every step of the process was a messy nightmare.

It was April 2008; I was a few months away from my final A-level exams and a 
summer of work, before heading off to Scotland. I dreamed of studying at 
Edinburgh University and living in one of the most beautiful cities in the 
world.

Things had become increasingly fragile and tense at the foster home I had 
lived in for more than seven years, and after exploring every route possible 
and trying to reconcile relationships, the placement had eventually broken down.

The decision was all mine, and it was the biggest jump I had ever made. I was 
entering the unknown. Where will I be moved to? Will I have any support? Will I 
be safe?

I started to feel like a second-class citizen rather than an unfortunate young 
person

I left the foster home in the morning with some clothes, my phone and a 
toothbrush, and called my social worker. She was my new worker and I hadn’t met 
her yet, but we had been in frequent contact over the difficulties I had in the 
foster home.

When I told her that I could no longer live there, she seemed angry and 
frustrated; “Why would you do this? This is not the right decision.” I was 
shocked. The local authority knew about everything I had been experiencing. In 
this time of deep worry, the last thing I needed was to be questioned for a 
decision I had obviously not made lightly.

She said: “I will get back to you later to let you know what will happen with 
you.” I started to feel like a second-class citizen that was grudgingly being 
moved to anywhere that might take me, rather than the unfortunate young person 
I was.

I tried to do some exam revision while I nervously waited. I was hoping to 
receive updates fairly regularly, given the life changing day that I was 
having, but didn’t hear anything into the afternoon.

I tried to call the local authority several times and eventually, I was put 
through to a man who didn’t even introduce himself. It felt like drawing blood 
from a stone, but eventually he gave me the address of a care unit, miles away, 
in an area I had never been to before.

“Is there any chance you could help me out with a taxi there?” I asked. “Ha! 
What do you think I am, a taxi service? You can make your own way there,” was 
his response. Of course I didn’t think he was a taxi service, but I wouldn’t 
have minded some compassion.

A few hours later, after a lot of help from school friends who knew London 
well, I found out how to get to this new place, and travelled the 90-minute 
journey to get there on my own. I arrived in the early evening to a building 
which looked like a prison. I was greeted by smiley but confused workers who 
weren’t expecting me. They said they didn’t have a room for me. Panic set in.

It took several phone calls to the care-unit manager and out-of-hours local 
authority staff to confirm I was due to stay at this unit after all.

It was a bright, warm day but the windows of the unit were closed, and a few 
of them had been boarded up with wood – it looks like they had been smashed 
quite recently. The place felt dangerous and edgy. And edgy was how I was 
feeling. How could I live here? I traipsed up to the second floor of the dark 
and desolate building with my key and bag of clothes in hand.

I went inside my new home and locked the door behind me as quickly as I could. 
By now I wanted to escape everyone, and I wanted to escape the whole day. I was 
truly drained and the realisation of my isolation and vulnerability started to 
sink in. Living in a tiny room, surrounded by people I didn’t know.

I had to cook, clean, wash clothes and fend for myself, as well as travel for 
three hours a day to school and study for my final exams. I had lots to do as 
deputy head boy, but I now lived much further away from my school, my friends 
and my two brothers.

Related: I was about to sit finals when I was abandoned by my parent – the 
state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/01/university-student-care-leaver-state>

The only potential constant in this situation, the local authority, my 
corporate parent, offered me little and inconsistent support in this move, and 
this persisted throughout my time in the care unit. It was like the process was 
designed to be as difficult as possible, compounded by speaking with people who 
didn’t seem to care about me in the slightest.

But the experience didn’t stop me from achieving my dreams. There was light at 
the end of the proverbial tunnel. I had the toughest six months of my life 
there, but I went on to fulfil my dream and study human geography at Edinburgh.

I loved every minute of it. I made lifelong friends, have the best of memories 
and achieved a 2:1. I got on to one of the best graduate schemes in the country 
and today I’m a manager in the health service. I lead a happy, successful life.

It is possible to thrive after experiencing unsettling transitions. But it 
shouldn’t have been so difficult and, if my experience is anything to go by, 
corporate parents need to do more to manage the uncertainty, desolation and 
confusion that young people face when moving between homes.

This new series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
