
Sir Alan Moses <http://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-alan-moses> made a 
trenchant, and often witty, defence of his role as chairman of the Independent 
Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) on Tuesday evening.

In a lengthy inaugural annual Ipso <http://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> 
lecture, he underlined the strength of the regulator’s independence from its 
paymasters - the overwhelming majority of Britain’s newspaper and magazine 
publishers - while lauding the virtues of press freedom and revealing a love 
for newsprint newspapers.

Along the way, without specifically identifying Ipso’s critics, he made 
several asides in which he derided attempts to create what he called “virtual 
regulation”. He had, he said, “an occasional sneaking envy for those who have 
the happy privilege of devising a system of regulation in theory.”

Moses, speaking at King’s College London, said: “Effective regulation requires 
enforceable powers. Enforceable powers require a legally binding contract 
enforceable in court... an agreement between the regulated and the regulator.

“Press regulation requires powers to be conferred on the regulator which are 
enforceable in a court of law, and obligations or duties to be imposed on the 
regulated which are enforceable in a court of law.”

The alternative to this voluntary system, he said, was imposing regulation 
through legislation, by statute, in other words, by licensing. That, of course, 
would be inimical to press freedom.

Moses said: “Even those who argue for fiercer sanctions to persuade the press 
to submit to the system they advocate must recognise that any system which 
depends upon agreement and not compulsion does depend upon persuasion, 
persuading the press that it is in their own interests to agree, and not upon 
coercion.”


He pointed out that “the vast majority” of newspapers and magazine publishers 
who have signed up to Ipso were not responsible for the “public outrage” that 
followed the revelation of phone hacking that resulted in the Leveson inquiry:

“The excesses of illegal process, the cruel invasions and bullying 
pre-judgment which had prompted the inquiry were miles away from anything in 
which the vast majority of publications, for example the magazines and local 
newspapers, had participated, let alone sanctioned or condoned.

Yet they were persuaded that, even in their cases, it was in their interests 
to support and join a process designed to provide some protection for the 
public and build some authority for themselves.”

So they signed up to Ipso, contended Moses, “for no other reason than a sense 
of loyalty and community, rare sentiments within the highly competitive and 
ferocious rivalry within the world of newspapers.”

In so doing, publishers were doing “precisely” what Leveson wanted: entering 
into “an enforceable agreement to a system of regulation which bound them to 
certain obligations.”

Moses admitted that, after taking the chairman’s job, he thought it necessary 
to amend Ipso’s rules in order “to achieve effective regulation.” It took 
months of negotiation, involving “substantial persuasion” to agree “substantial 
changes”.


Critics regarded the changes as trivial, but this was not true, said Moses. 
“They reinforced our independence, placing detailed rules for the consideration 
of complaints entirely within Ipso’s own power, whereas before, the rules were 
either silent or part of the contractual terms.”

Changes to “procedural rules” mean “there is now far less room for manoeuvre 
to delay an investigation, or question the power to launch it in any particular 
case.”

A funding agreement also ensured that Ipso has “sufficient and effective 
financial autonomy” which “was regarded as a core feature of independence in 
the Leveson report.”


Moses said there had been “a dramatic improvement in the time it takes for a 
newspaper to deal with and resolve a complaint with a member of the public.”

And he pointed to Ipso’s “power to dictate which correction should be 
published, the words which should be used, where the correction should be put 
and how it should be presented, in which font size and with which headline.”

He said: “When we are told that our nine front page notices of correction are 
inadequate, it is as well to recall that never before have there been any front 
page corrections dictated by a regulator...ever.”

Turning to the editors’ code of practice, he said: “In my salad days, when I 
was green in experience of press regulation, I thought: should not the 
regulator be in charge of setting the standards?”

But “my experience has made me far more agnostic as to whether there should 
ever be anything other than the editors’ code [because] it is after all they 
who are responsible for what appears in the newspaper, for the content, for 
what they put in and equally important what they omit.”

He revealed that there will be a new round of consultations on the code at the 
end of this year and that no changes can occur changed without Ipso’s consent.

Meanwhile, an independent scrutiny of Ipso’s activities is being carried out 
by Sir Joseph Pilling, the former permanent secretary at the Northern Ireland 
office.

He concluded by hymning printed newspapers “with their geography, their 
serendipity and their smell... we need verifiable reliable sources of news and 
we need journalism, and that is not the same as the outpourings of flatulent 
trolls who feel free to disseminate whatever they like, but say nothing.”

He said, citing Kant’s dictum: “Our views of the newspapers depend upon our 
own views, and they are as crooked as the crooked timber of humanity from which 
no straight thing was ever made.”

In a Q&A session following the lecture, Moses was asked whether the fact that 
the Daily Mail’s editor,Paul Dacre <http://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>
, chaired the editors’ code committee compromised Ipso’s credibility.

He pointed out that Dacre’s role was separate from the regulator and 
reiterated that the code could not be changed without Ipso’s consent.

Moses also batted away other minor criticisms from a small number of 
questioners among a largely supportive and appreciative audience.


Full disclosure: I chaired the lecture, stepping in at the last moment because 
the original chair, Steve Hewlett, was indisposed. The Guardian, like the 
Financial Times, the Independent and the London Evening Standard, is not a 
member of Ipso.
