
I am the poster girl for the menopause, despite the fact that there is 
absolutely no good news about the menopause. Its path is straight to the grave 
and women like me can hope for nothing more than thinning hair and skin, loss 
of bone density, weight gain, night sweats, smelling strangely even to 
ourselves and that ever wonderful “vaginal atrophy”. But, after four years of 
sexless fidelity, I find myself a post-menopausal singleton in the throes of 
nymphomania. I want sex more than ever and that fact shreds everything I know 
about this sad post-fertile state. Tell me my vagina is a desert and I’ll tell 
you it’s feeling like a ruddy oasis.

In discussions about this surge with colleagues, I am encouraged to download 
Tinder,Bumble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/12/bumble-dating-app-women-call-shots-whitney-wolfe>
 andHappn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/19/break-out-the-chamomile-tea-scary-tinder-is-outdated-enter-happn>
. I’d never gone digital for sex because I had never needed to.

I may be closer to 60 than 50 but a lifetime of care and good genes mean I can 
pass for 42 and I do.

The menopause has caused me to lose weight and I have a leaner look than I did 
in my 20s. With gay and straight friends approving my photo profile, I go 
online expecting ridicule or silence. I put the apps’ radius near to my office. 
I choose the widest male age range – and wait.

The response is incredible. The photos have pulled men of 22 – and yes, I 
could almost be their grandmother – up to 63. My timelines are packed with 
splendid males, creatures so beautiful that I gasp. It’s a box of chocolates 
from which I get to pick and choose (especially with Bumble, where nothing 
happens until the woman makes the first move). Analogue life was never like 
this. I chat to them and discover that every young man likes kissing, has a 
bike and thinks he’s a photographer – a fascinating trope.

At first, I’m nervous to meet. I arrange drinks with younger men and some 
older. These meetings shore up my confidence but don’t quench my own 
performance concerns. After so many years of having sex with myself, would the 
old girl downstairs remember what to do?

“You could experience vaginal dryness,” my doctor warns, after telling me 
that, yes, I could indeed pass for 42 and that I must not forget to use 
protection. More and more people in my age range are getting STIs and worse. 
This alone makes me feel part of a vanguard of sexual vampires who refuse to 
die. Dryness is news to me. So, after a few misfires (one man didn’t even walk 
me out of the pub where we agreed to meet), a particularly attractive 
24-year-old seems eager to come home with me. I go into hostess mode. I put out 
snacks. He’s not interested in the snacks. One thing leads to another and just 
when I’m sure bats will fly out of my derelict vagina, muscle memory kicks in. 
I remember doing this before the internet!

He feels amazing, seems pleased enough and I almost snog the life out of him. 
Afterwards, he sleeps in completely clobbered stillness and leaves the next 
morning like a gentleman. I’ve done it. I’ve broken my celibacy. But my parts 
have taken a hit.

At the walk-in clinic, I’m told I have a common ailment, BV 
<http://www.bvexplained.co.uk/> – something men can give women but women can’t 
give men, sort of like diamonds or a mink coat only bad. Five incredibly strong 
tablets (“If you have alcohol with these, you will get an epileptic fit and I 
mean it,” says the doctor) and a dose of white paste and I’m back on the road. 
I must be OK.

I’m amazed they don’t find an older woman a turn-off. Every time I’m told I 
have a great body, I have to stifle a laugh

Getting back into the sex game post-menopause is a little trickier than first 
time around when the only prerequisites were wearing your best frock and 
getting drunk. I actually have to be prepared and careful. For the first time 
in my life, I buy lubricant for myself and not for the car.

Yes, I find a few more men and they are, every single one of them, sexy and 
gorgeous. I don’t remember this many handsome men, even in a catalogue. I never 
thought I liked younger men, but I do – not just for their performance levels, 
although there is that. I love their hopefulness, kindness and interest. I 
watch them looking at me and I wonder if they’ve taken a sneak at my driving 
licence. Mainly, they are confident and happy and they know a lot more about 
sex than they should. Are they all equipped with girlfriends at 12? Do I have 
online porn to thank for this? One 25-year-old does things I didn’t know were 
possible. He’s so good I feel I’ve discovered another room in my house.

There are times I feel so comfortable (and, possibly, drunk) that I wonder if 
I shouldn’t bring up the menopause. But I stop myself. These are men, not 
therapists or girlfriends. As much as they seem to care, they are here for the 
same thing I want. That’s what we have in common.

I’m constantly amazed that they don’t find an older woman a turn-off. 
Everytime I’m told I have a great body, I have to stifle a laugh. I pose the 
question to one who is annoying me, “Why do you want an older woman? She 
doesn’t want a relationship, marriage or babies from you. She has her own 
money. She’s emotionally stable. So what’s in it for you?”

Repeatedly I get the question, “Do you prefer young men?” to which I say, 
“It’s the man, not his age.”

I actually mean this until I have drinks with a couple of men nearer my own 
age. Meeting with them is a downer. They like Harleys and rock’n’roll. They 
look backwards, not forwards. They look at me and, I think, wish I’d have my 
personality removed. Maybe I don’t worship them enough?

Neither time do they offer to come back or even give me a goodnight snog. They 
are alarmed that I pay for drinks. Why can’t the dudes of my youth keep up with 
the times? I try several more clicks on older men, but the younger ones just 
present themselves better. Blokes my age need to get proper photos – and maybe 
see the dentist.

Meanwhile, my GP is concerned for my sexual health. I try to explain that one 
chap was sized like a fire hydrant but apparently that shouldn’t matter. She’s 
not amused as she gives me a prescription for the same cream that a well-known 
singer uses, apparently, to keep her inner rock star happy and useful.

With that, I up my game. I change my hair, wear better clothes and listen to 
new music like the X Ambassadors. I feel younger. I actually feel sexier than I 
did in my 30s and forget how old I really am.

As I spend more time on the apps, I grow bolder. I think I am probably 
addicted now, checking them more often than I do Instagram, Facebook, Snapchat 
and Twitter. I make jokes after a few drinks with friends, seeing strangers and 
saying, “Haven’t I seen you on Tinder?”

I'm not here for kink or naughty thrills. I'm here to get my life back – 
specifically, my sexual confidence

Again to my surprise, two old “friends” emerge from the woodwork to ask me 
out. They tell me after three beers that they were always interested. Men at 
parties begin to ask me out on dates – real, actual dates. I must smell 
different or something.

But I worry. I worry about diseases. I worry that my pelvic floor is going to 
cave in like a Chilean mine. I order a Kegel8, a miracle machine that brings my 
vagina back to life like a defibrillator. My growler is so strong I can almost 
climb trees with it. Naturally, I am thrilled.

Back at the clinic, I have tests and all are clear. Just as the doctor is 
drawing blood, my ex calls and we argue. I start to cry and realise how much I 
really love and miss him.

So, again, I attempt to date someone of my own age. I meet a man who wants a 
relationship. This is a horrible mistake because I really do not want a 
permanent man, even if it would make things somewhat less hotel-like: I must be 
the only person who changes the sheets every time. Sadly, I have to block him 
on WhatsApp and blame myself for hurting his feelings.

How could I think I could snap back into a less embarrassing position of 
dating men half my age and loving it?

On Happn, a dating/sex app that shows you who crosses your path, I find that 
my entire neighbourhood is filled with freaks. I never expected danger here. 
One man sends me porn which, under normal circumstances I wouldn’t find 
shocking. When it arrives on my phone, I want to be sick because I’m not here 
for kink, for dress-up, fantasy-play or naughty thrills. I’m here to get my 
life back – and for me, that means, specifically, my sexual confidence. Even if 
my vagina doesn’t want to play ball the way it used to, I must find a way to 
have sex until death. It’s that important to me. It’s not worth living without 
that surge of desire.

But I know that this isn’t really about sex. This is about reclamation. I am 
fighting off the death that menopause automatically brings. I refuse to be 
subsumed into its shadow.

Post-menopause, I’ve had a sex life that I didn’t have in my 20s. I’ve had men 
who wouldn’t have looked at me twice back then. But despite the enormous 
pleasure I’ve had, it is only when I begin to fall for one of them that I 
realise how limited my time is. The weirdos, the beauties and the lonely, 
lonely men cannot remain the point of my life. I have no idea where this 
endless parade of unimaginable pleasure will take me. But I have to find out, 
as every woman does.

Laurett Fenn is a pseudonym
