
I am incredibly annoyed with my friend, X. That is not his real initial; I am 
at least going to offer him a disguise, although passive-aggressively I am 
going to quote him so faithfully that he will know it's him.

If I thought he was alone in any of these thoughts, I wouldn't mention it; 
it's only because I suspect him of being the mouthpiece of debonair 
non-parenthood that I want to kick his head in.

So anyway, we were talking about my birth plans, which were that S, my sister, 
would look after T, while me and C went to hospital. I was complaining because 
S was going away for a weekend, but in fairness, it was 10 days before, and I 
wasn't that worried about it. But X said, "Well, you can't expect her to cancel 
her whole month, only the one day," and I said, "Not exactly, X, only 5% of 
babies actually arrive on their due dates. You have to have some leeway," and 
he said, "What about C?", and I said, "C will be with me. C is my birth 
partner. That's how it works these days." "Huh," said X, as if I was being 
incredibly high-maintenance. "I'm not being high-maintenance. That is how it 
works." "Huh," he said again, as if I'd just rung C from the hairdressers and 
made him come home from work to pick me up, because it was windy.

I have more misgivings about birth-partner protocol than I let on. Three 
months prior to each of these childbirths, C has started to mutter "amusingly" 
about how he'd rather not be my birth partner; he'd rather be in the pub with a 
cigar. It's always in front of other people; perhaps someone from Relate can 
write in, with a methodological formula for the "awkward" conversation your 
boyfriend raises in public, so you can't make it any more awkward by replying. 
I imagine you're meant to stash it for later, and raise it in a relaxed way 
when you're both alone. I do not have the maturity nor, for that matter, the 
memory, for that tactic.

So anyway, I always do reply in public. I always say, "Go to the pub, then! 
I'll get someone else," and he always rolls his eyes, as if he has made an 
hilarious joke, which I have taken the wrong way, like in the Madness song. In 
fact neither of us is joking. He is fine in a birth scenario, but I don't agree 
with the orthodoxy here: that it's so momentous, only the father will do. The 
person you want there is the one who has your best interests at heart but can 
also, through experience or expertise, be of practical assistance, and 
moreover, isn't going to do anything stupid, like look bored or eat all the way 
through, or download an app for his iPhone or be too busy texting when the baby 
is born to symbolically cut the umbilical cord.

That is pretty much a litany of what the birth-partner father does. They make 
the umbilical faux pas so often it should be called the symbilical cord, and it 
will symbolically encompass all your arguments for the next five years. "Yeah, 
but . . ." continued X, "Why couldn't C just look after T while you went to the 
hospital, and join you there when the babysitter or someone had arrived." "X, 
nobody goes to hospital to give birth alone. It would be like trying to get 
your appendix out and clear Customs at the same time. Even a pregnant murderer 
would arrive with some kind of case worker." "Well, why don't you just take T 
with you and leave him in an anteroom?" "Yeah, that'd be fun for him, and not 
at all traumatic. To be left in a hospital room on his own, while both his 
parents disappear and he can hear one or maybe both of them screaming."

Poor X. Why am I going on like this? It's not a personal vendetta against this 
one person, who is, by the Portuguese saying, one of my only true friends ("You 
have five true friends and the rest is landscape," is the saying). It's because 
I know that's what everybody thinks, who hasn't just had and/or witnessed the 
having of a baby. I know they think parents make a mountain out of 
administrative concerns that a competent person could solve in a second. When 
we don't! We've really thought this through. Itis a mountain.
