
In recent years there has been increased government and media focus on the 
benefits of adoption for children in care who cannot return to their birth 
families, the importance of reducing the time children wait for a permanent 
placement and the need to increase the number of adoptive families available.

One option that has not had enough attention is the potential contribution 
foster carers could make to improving the chances of achieving adoption, 
particularly for children who may be seen as harder to place. While foster 
carer adoption has always been possible, it is an area of practice that has 
been a source of divergent views and controversy over the past 30 years, and 
only represents around 15% of adoptions in England and Wales.


There are clear benefits for a child being adopted by their foster carer, the 
most obvious being the continuation of relationships and attachments with the 
foster family. It also means fewer moves for the child, the chance to remain in 
the community, school or nursery they have become familiar with, and – for some 
– a greater likelihood of maintaining a connection with their birth family or 
siblings.

Related: British Association of Social Workers launches inquiry into adoption 
ethics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/10/british-association-of-social-workers-adoption-inquiry>

There are also challenges for social workers to address so they can make the 
best decisions for the children they are responsible for: how can 
confidentiality be maintained if the carers are known to the birth family or 
live in the same area? Should carers stop fostering other children for a period 
of time? What level of financial support will they need if their role is 
changing and how might this affect the child?

 Ultimately, each case must be decided on its merits, with social workers 
balancing strengths, concerns and areas for support. There may be times when 
the barriers are assessed as being too great, but it is important that social 
workers keep foster carers involved in trying to find solutions to the 
practical issues where there are no other concerns about their ability to offer 
permanence. Some foster carers have moved house, moved area and even changed 
their names to ensure the child’s – and their family’s – safety.

When assessing foster carers, it is important for social workers to recognise 
that their motivation and route to adoption will be different to that of 
“stranger” adopters and based on the bond and attachments that have developed 
while the child has been in their care. Some carers have described negative 
responses from social workers to their request to adopt, based on a view that 
this is a back-door route to adoption or a reluctance to lose a valuable 
fostering resource. It is important that local authorities have clear policies 
so carers receive consistent responses across the social work teams involved. 
Research has shown that the attitude of key people in a local authority can 
have a positive impact on foster carers coming forward to adopt.

Social workers need to ensure that foster carers consider the differences 
between their role and that of a prospective adopter and the long-term impact 
on their family and the child. Ideally this should be through attending 
tailored group training for carers adopting, but where this is not available 
they should have the opportunity to meet and talk with other carers who have 
adopted. It is important too that they are given full information about the 
child’s past and implications for their future health and emotional needs, 
which may not have been made available to them in their fostering role.

Related: Can the Mockingbird model of foster care fly in the UK? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/28/mockingbird-foster-care-uk-social-work>

Social workers should inform foster carers that they will have access to the 
Adoption <https://www.theguardian.com/society/adoption> Support Fund to provide 
them with additional resources. Where children are already settled in their 
fostering placement and there has been an assessment of their immediate and 
longer-term needs, it is now possible to apply to the fund so work can start 
even before an adoption order is made.

Research has shown that financial support can be a key factor in enabling 
foster carers to adopt and agencies should consider how they determine these 
allowances and tailor them to the needs of the family.

 Evidence from other countries such as the US and Northern Ireland suggests 
that a more consistent and positive view of carer adoption in the sector could 
ensure that the stability and security offered by adoption is extended to more 
children in local authority care.

The decision to adopt a child from foster care is a life-changing one for both 
the child and their foster family, and the support of helpful and informed 
practitioners is essential in making this happen.

 * Elaine Dibben is co-author of Adoption by Foster Carers: 
<http://corambaaf.org.uk/bookshop/Adoption-by-Foster-Carers> A guide to 
preparing, assessing and supporting foster carers adopting children in their 
care, published byCoramBAAF <http://corambaaf.org.uk/>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
