
It took merely two days for Jeremy Corbyn to bow before Brussels and become 
the Alexis Tsipras of the Labour party (Corbyn rules out fighting for Britain 
to leave EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/16/jeremy-corbyn-rules-out-fighting-for-britain-to-leave-eu>
, 17 September). And he has done this at the very time that Jean-Claude 
Juncker, president of the European commission, has been told by the committee 
investigating Luxembourg tax deals that the hearing would not seriously damage 
him when he was questioned about his role in overseeing a system, while prime 
minister of Luxembourg, in which as many as 340 sweetheart deals were allowed 
with multinational companies in that country – including PepsiCo and Ikea – to 
reduce their legal tax burdens as low as 1%. Meanwhile unemployment in the EU 
remains at 11% and youth unemployment in southern Europe at 40%-50%. We have 
already seen the terms that Tsipras was forced to accept for Greece. It seems 
that Corbyn – like that other economic genius, Alan Johnson, and indeed like so 
many in the so-called “Labour” movement – immediately loses grip on his mental 
faculties whenever Europe is mentioned. Do they honestly believe that workers’ 
rights will be protected by Juncker, Schäuble and their ilk? Labour deserves to 
disappear.
Professor Alan Sked
LSE

• Corbyn’s reaffirmation of his initial position (Jeremy Corbyn backs British 
membership of EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/28/jeremy-corbyn-backs-british-membership-of-eu>
, 28 July) “to fight for a better Europe” is most welcome. Paul Kenny’s GMB 
advocacy of leaving if Cameron manages to get some opt-outs from EU workers’ 
rights is shortsighted and self-defeating. The EU still offers better 
employment and union rights than a Tory Britain on its own; and a future 
government can restore any lost rights if the UK is still in the EU. Why leave 
it for a more toxic “Little Britain”, or a more chauvinist “Little England” if 
Scotland stays in the EU? With an EU external border entrenching Irish 
partition and probably wrecking the “peace process”? And losing how many jobs 
after four decades in the EEC/EU? Socialists followingKenny could have a lot of 
explaining to do.

This is not 1975 but left Euroscepticism and defensive backward-looking 
insularity could still pose a problem (Corbyn will struggle to hold his line 
over Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/17/jeremy-corbyn-europe-labour-trouble-unions>
, 18 September). Here the obvious answer is hopeful, forward-looking 
internationalism. Along with anti-austerity coalitions across the EU, including 
the SNP and the Greens, and groups like Podemos in Spain, People before Profit 
in Ireland, Syriza in Greece and Der Linke in Germany, Corbyn needs to embark 
immediately on the “fight for a better Europe”.
James Anderson
Professor emeritus, Institute for the Study of Conflict Transformation and 
Social Justice, Queen’s University Belfast

• The EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> will 
be a device that attempts to paper over a deep split in the Conservative party. 
Why should anyone other than these protagonists participate? A campaign for 
abstention by the main opposition parties would expose this, the 
unrepresentative turnout giving a meaningless referendum result.

Such a result, whichever way it went, would give the Commons no reason to 
change Britain’s current relationship with the EU. Britain’s membership and its 
terms are matters that ought to be decided by MPs, who have access to and time 
to consider the technical information. Isn’t this the sort of thing we elect 
them to do?
Roger Joanes
George Nympton, Devon

• Various broadcast interviews last week, such as that with the head of the 
TUC, emphasised that Corbyn and the TUC could advocate EU exit if Cameron’s EU 
negotiations result in some reduced rights for British workers. This is wholly 
irrational: leaving the EU would leave the Tories free from all EU constraints 
and free to go even further in cutting social and employment regulations.
Malcolm Levitt
London
