
I was 11 when you were born, and in your first few years I often looked after 
you, bathed and dressed you and took you out for walks. I remember pushing your 
pram to the shops one afternoon, still in my school uniform, and wondering 
whether the people we passed thought I was a teenage mother. I once took you to 
the sweet shop to buy apple drops and was gripped with absolute terror when you 
started choking on one. I smacked your little form, at first gently and then 
harder, on the back until the shiny marbled ball came flying out from the back 
of your throat. I realised in my relief how much I loved you.

As the smallest, unexpected arrival in a family whose forte has never been 
communication, we all doted on you and loved to make you laugh.

I have vivid memories of your childhood – so much more so than for our other 
sister and brother, who are closer in age to me. Of dressing you up in our 
mother’s knee-high boots, lace blouse and jewellery, as a “rock star”. Of 
giving you baths in the kitchen sink and watching you dance to Top of the Pops 
in polka-dot pyjamas. Of your first school uniform and your insistence that I 
make your school lunch because I put so much more peanut butter on your 
sandwiches than anyone else. Of the longest phone call we ever had – an echo of 
my own university years – when you wanted to drop out of university and study 
dance.

I imagine you believe we have little in common – but in you I see some of my 
own dreams realised

Since we have grown up, I have lived vicariously through you, although you may 
not know it. You had the opportunity I so desperately wanted but never got – to 
train in the performing arts. I encouraged our parents to support you in 
following that path because I have always wondered how my life would be if they 
had been less fixated on a traditional career path for me, their eldest child. 
I still have moments where I consider a change of career, but who becomes a 
dancer in their late 30s?

So, despite knowing that you have struggled to find work and confidence, and 
that you probably wonder sometimes if you made the right choice, I am happy for 
you and proud that I played some small role in helping you to follow a dream.

There’s a distance between us now. It has grown since I first left home to 
travel, in the process missing your teenage years. That saddens me greatly. I 
imagine that you believe that we have very little in common – a city-dwelling 
dancer and a grubby biologist living in West Africa – but in you I see some of 
my own dreams realised, and much of my own personality expressed.

But beyond that, even at 12 or 13 I felt as much a mother to you as an older 
sister. So, on the rare occasions that we see each other, I want to know 
everything, to hear your concerns and hopes and delights.

I wish I understood why now, as adults, you hold me at arm’s length. I hope we 
can one day find a way to be sisters or friends again. I still make a mean 
peanut butter sandwich.

Anonymous
