 From the first Fabian tract ( Why are the Many Poor?) and the original Fabian 
Essays, published in 1889 in the wake of the Match Girls' Strike, the society 
has been characterised by a passionate commitment to social justice and a 
belief in the progressive improvement of society. It has always maintained a 
diversity of opinion, motivated by the desire to stimulate debate rather than 
to promote a particular political "line". Its publications represent only the 
views of their authors.
 In 1900 the Fabian Society joined with the trade unions to found the Labour 
party, and has remained affiliated to it ever since. From the earliest days 
Labour's political ideas were heavily influenced by the Fabians: Sidney Webb 
substantially wrote both the party's1918 Constitution (including the original 
Clause IV) and its programmeLabour and the New Social Order.

Along with Lloyd George and Beveridge, the Webbs can be said to be founders of 
the modern welfare state. Fabian Society pamphlets first proposedthe creation 
of the National Health Service in 1911, the introduction of a minimum wage in 
1906, and the abolition of hereditary peers in 1917.

In the pre-war period Fabian authors such as Leonard Woolf, RH Tawney and GDH 
Cole created an intellectual basis for democratic socialism. At this time 
Clement Attlee, Hugh Gaitskell and Herbert Morrison were among the society's 
leading members. When Labour won its landslide victory in 1945 so many Fabians 
were elected (over 220) that the parliamentary Labour party was said to "look 
just like an enormous Fabian school".

 In the post-war period the Fabian Society was at the heart of Labour and 
social democratic thinking. TheNew Fabian Essays of 1952, edited by Anthony 
Crosland, helped to reinvigorate debate on the left after the fall of the 
Attlee government: its contributors included Roy Jenkins, Ian Mikardo, Richard 
Crossman and Denis Healey.

In subsequent decades influential Fabian authors included Richard Titmuss, 
Peter Townsend, Brian Abel-Smith, Tony Benn and Ben Pimlott, the last four of 
whom (along with - among others - Crosland. Jenkins, Harold Wilson, Shirley 
Williams, Tessa Blackstone and Robin Cook) were also at different times Chairs 
of the Society.

 In the 1990s the Fabian Society was a major influence in the modernisation of 
the Labour party. Its report on the constitution of the party was instrumental 
in the introduction of "one member one vote" and made the original 
recommendation for the replacement of Clause IV. A series of pamphlets on the 
attitudes of swing voters in the South of England (theSouthern Discomfort 
series) paved the way for changes both to policy and electoral strategy.

 Since the 1997 general election there have been around 200 Fabian MPs in the 
Commons, amongst whom number nearly the entire cabinet, including Tony Blair, 
Gordon Brown, Robin Cook, Jack Straw, David Blunkett and Clare Short. The 
society has pursued its role as the new Labour government's "critical friend", 
seeking to ask challenging questions and to stimulate public debate.

The Society's two-year Commission on Taxation and Citizenship criticised 
Labour's reluctance to discuss taxation and proposed, among other reforms, an 
earmarked tax for the NHS. Reports on environmental policy, capital grants to 
young people and parental leave directly influenced government policy in key 
areas. The society published both Tony Blair's seminal pamphlet on the Third 
Way and Lionel Jospin's philosophy of the active state.

Meanwhile the society's growing membership and ever larger numbers coming to 
its public conferences have proved that - whatever the wider trends to 
political apathy and disaffection - the appetite for radical thought and 
searching debate on the left of centre remains undiminished. At the start of 
the 21st century the society plays as crucial a role in the political life of 
the country as ever.
