
Every time - I'm actually not exaggerating - this is how the conversation goes 
between me and C. "I'm taking T to the creche." "The creche in the gym?" "Still 
the only creche in the area, beloved, unless we move near Bluewater." "Are you 
staying in the gym or coming straight home." "Still have to remain on the 
premises, while the child is in the gym. You can remember the rules of CRICKET 
..." " ... laws ..." "You cannot remember the rules of the creche, which has 
only one rule." (Actually there are three rules: don't leave the gym, no ill 
children, and no food that doesn't have a lable. I said, "You know it's 
l-a-b-e-l," and she asked, very nicely, not sarcastically, "Are you a teacher?" 
It dawned on me that, of everybody who had gone in and out of there since the 
lable rule came into force, I was the first person who'd been enough of an arse 
to point this out. How could I possibly admit, from here, that I wasn't a 
teacher, I was just a regular person who liked to point out poor spelling. So I 
said, "Yes, I am actually." And now I have an imaginary job, but it's just 
supply work because I haven't gone back full-time and I don't want to make up 
the names of any schools.

This has happened to me once before, when I started baby-sitting at 14, 
pretending I was 16, and was such a reliable, loyal, if mendacious employee, 
that I was still doing it four years later, by which time I'd had to fabricate 
GCSE results, A-levels, a place at an imaginary university and a fake gap year.

So anyway, the short point is that I can't send C to take T to the gym, 
because: a) he would then have to stay in the gym, and b) he would find out 
that they think I'm a teacher, and I genuinely wouldn't put it past him, even 
though we are meant to be united in our beautiful journey through life, to 
totally sell me out and say, "She's not a teacher, she has no qualifications of 
any sort." And this is a shame, because I want him to witness how much T likes 
hanging out with people his own age or, ideally, one person older than he is, 
to look up to, and a couple of people younger than he is, to throw things at.

There's this rhetorical convention with childcare, that you never make a 
decision that's better for, or - this is the total taboo - cheaper for you. You 
only ever do anything because it's what the child really, really wants. Or if 
the child is too young for you to be able to glean any preference, then you do 
it because it's better for someone else, a family member. I cannot believe I've 
bought into this, it is so totally transparent. You can see from a mile away 
that, whoever I leave T with, it's because it suits me and I want to go and do 
something else. But I do the "Isn't it lovely for him?" every time. We left T 
with his grandparents for the whole

weekend over Valentine's day, and I'm still pretending it was so they could 
really get to know one another, when actually they know each other so well they 
could probably all play Mr & Mrs if only T would hurry up and learn to speak, 
and we really did it so we could leave London and read the paper. In the event, 
I got so excited about which bit of the paper I was going to read next I 
couldn't concentrate on any of the actual words, and now the only thing I can 
remember from the entire weekend is the cruise brochure from the Sunday Times.

The parenting mill feeds this desire for martyrish self-presentation with 
endless studies about where children do best. Because there are so many of them 
and the actual research is always really flimsy, you can never remember which 
way round it is. Do they do better with a nanny, or a childminder? I am not 
being contrary,

I honestly can't remember. I know I was angered by a report that said 
nurseries were better than grandparents (whose grandparents? Which nursery? 
Idiots!), but I still find myself weighing in on the wrong side by accident.

Anyway, sorry, I started this with an anti-example, a perfect non-illustration 
of my point.

T genuinely does love the creche. Whereas I absolutely hate going to the gym.
