
Four of the world’s most influential and innovative publishers are today 
unveiling thePangaea Alliance <http://www.pangaeaalliance.com/>, a new digital 
advertising proposition that will allow brands to collectively access a highly 
influential global audience via the latest programmatic technology.


Spearheaded by the Guardian, Pangaea brings together CNN International, the 
Financial Times and Reuters as founding partners, with The Economist also 
providing access to advertising inventory.

The alliance is being launched in beta from April 2015 and will offer 
advertisers the ability to access inventory across the group of premium 
publishers via the Rubicon Project technology platform. During the beta phase 
Pangaea will offer display solutions both as a standalone product and alongside 
existing publisher initiatives including native advertising programmes and 
publisher trading desks.

The combined heritage and influence of the partners ensures Pangaea is 
uniquely positioned to offer brands trusted and influential advertising 
environments, in tandem with the alliance’s innovative audience targeting. By 
working together to share data and formats, these traditionally competitive 
organisations are able to offer brands bespoke automated advertising solutions 
which complement the publishers’ existing digital commercial proposition.

Pangaea will deliver the following benefits to advertisers. 

Global quality at scale: The 110 million user-strong audience reached by the 
alliance is made up of highly influential and affluent individuals - one in 
four people are in the top income segments and one fifth are C-suite/senior 
management executives. Pangaea’s global reach is incredibly strong, with 
readers spread across North America, Europe, the Middle East and Asia Pacific, 
making it the perfect solution for pan-regional campaigns.

Trust and heritage: With hundreds of years of collective publishing 
experience, Pangaea gives brands access to respected media companies which 
bring innovative thinking and a deep understanding of the future of digital 
publishing. Pangaea also allays advertisers’ concerns about the ‘black box’ of 
programmatic spending - brands can be safe in the knowledge their creative is 
appearing next to quality content.

More effective targeting: With partners sharing their first-party data, 
Pangaea will also offer advertisers the unique ability to understand an 
audience like never before, delivering hyper-targeted campaigns and deeper 
connections with readers.

Unparalleled creativity and innovation: Pangaea will allow brands to advertise 
using the most creative, technically advanced and engaging advertising formats 
on the market. This gives them the ability to create a coherent story across 
their media partners, and more meaningful relationships with prospective 
customers.

Ease of use: Pangaea creates a uniform, media-rich experience across one 
simple programmatic buy. Ads will work seamlessly across all the publishers, 
and advertisers will be able to liaise with just one point of contact for all 
publishers within the alliance.

The beta phase of the Pangaea Alliance will be managed by a central team which 
includes commercial leadership and operational resource from all the member 
publishers. On full launch, later this year, Pangaea will be managed by its own 
sales team, meaning advertisers will have one port of call for all their 
Pangaea needs.

Tim Gentry, global revenue director at Guardian News & Media and Pangaea 
Alliance project lead, said:“As the world becomes more complex and networked, 
Pangaea will give advertisers one single programmatic solution for driving 
influence at scale, allowing them to get cut-through in an increasingly 
fragmented market using the latest ad serving technology. Pangaea’s uniqueness 
lies in the quality of its partners. We know that trust is the biggest driver 
of brand advocacy, so we have come together to scale the benefits of 
advertising within trusted media environments, which are geared towards 
delivering cutting-edge creative campaigns in technically advanced formats.”

Ends

For further information please contact:

In the UK:
Guardian News & Media Press Office
 media.enquiries@theguardian.com / + 44 (0) 20 3353 3696 

In the US:

SHIFT Communications, for Guardian US / +1 617.779.1800
guardianUS@shiftcomm.com

In Australia:

Text 100, for Guardian Australia
guardianaustralia@text100.com / + 61 (0) 2 9956 5733

Quotes from Pangaea Alliance Partners

Rani Raad, Chief Commercial Officer, CNN International, said: “CNN has a long 
track-record for being at the forefront of innovation – in the way we make and 
tell the news, the platforms we’re available on and the brand solutions we 
offer advertisers and commercial partners. In the fast-developing area of 
programmatic trading, it makes sense for us to collaborate with other leading 
news companies to gain first mover advantage through a powerful global 
alliance. This opportunity will extend to a wide range of agencies and brands 
that want to harness the power of the innovative platforms, rich content mix 
and large-scale premium audiences delivered through Pangaea. This is an 
exciting addition to CNN International’s commercial proposition, coming soon 
after we’ve just launched a new bold, responsive website.”

Dominic Good, advertising sales director at the Financial Times, said: “The 
quality of the Financial Times audience is what our advertisers buy. Pangaea is 
an exciting initiative that strengthens premium publishers’ proposition by 
guaranteeing a trusted advertising environment, building significant scale and 
sharing smart targeting abilities.”

Shane Cunningham, Global Commercial Director at Reuters Consumer Media, said 
“With trading becoming increasingly automated and data focused, trust has moved 
front and centre with our client and agency partners. As a leading source for 
timely and impartial reporting, Reuters continues to drive engagement with the 
business elite around the world. Pangaea enables us to expand on this quality 
at scale, with similarly trusted and respected partners. Reuters is extremely 
proud to be part of the Pangaea alliance.”

Gregory R. Raifman, President of Rubicon Project, said: “Rubicon Project is 
thrilled to have our technology and innovative approach to powering 
co-operatives selected to support the ground-breaking Pangaea Alliance. ”

Notes to editors

Pangaea website: http://pangaeaalliance.com/ <http://pangaeaalliance.com/>

About Guardian News & Media

Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com, the third largest 
English-speaking newspaper website in the world (comScore, December 2014). 
Since launching its US and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 
respectively, traffic from outside of the UK now represents around two-thirds 
of the Guardian’s total digital audience.

In the UK, GNM publishes the Guardian newspaper six days a week, first 
published in 1821, and the world’s oldest Sunday newspaper, The Observer.

The Guardian is most recently renowned for its Pulitzer Prize and Emmy-winning 
revelations based on the disclosures made by whistleblower Edward Snowden. In 
2014, the Guardian was named newspaper and website of the year at the Society 
of Editors UK Press Awards and is the most trusted news source in the UK (Ofcom 
digital media report, 2014).

The Guardian is also known for its globally acclaimed investigation into phone 
hacking, the launch of its ground-breaking digital-first strategy in 2011 and 
its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010.

About CNN International 

CNN’s portfolio of news and information services is available in five 
different languages across all major TV, internet and mobile platforms reaching 
more than 385 million households around the globe. CNN International, awarded 
“News Channel of the Year” by the Royal Television Society in 2013 and 2014, is 
the number one international TV news channel according to all major media 
surveys across Europe, the Middle East and Africa, the Asia Pacific region and 
Latin America. The CNN digital network is consistently one of the top news and 
current affairs destination on the web. CNN has 42 editorial offices and more 
than 1,100 affiliates worldwide through CNN Newsource. CNN International is 
part of Turner Broadcasting System, Inc., a Time Warner company.

About the Financial Times

The Financial Times, one of the world’s leading business news organisations, 
is recognised internationally for its authority, integrity and accuracy. 
Providing essential news, comment, data and analysis for the global business 
community, the FT has a combined paid print and digital circulation of 720,000 
(Deloitte assured, Q4 2014). Mobile is an increasingly important channel for 
the FT, driving almost 50 per cent of total traffic. FT education products now 
serve two thirds of the world’s top 50 business schools. For news about the FT 
follow @FTPressOffice.

About Reuters

Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s 
largest international multimedia news provider reaching more than one billion 
people every day. Reuters provides trusted business, financial, national, and 
international news to professionals via Thomson Reuters desktops, the world’s 
media organizations, and directly to consumers at Reuters.com and Reuters TV. 
For more information, go towww.reuters.com <http://www.reuters.com>. 

About Rubicon Project 

Rubicon Project (NYSE: RUBI) has engineered the Advertising Automation Cloud, 
one of the largest real-time cloud and Big Data computing systems. The 
Company’s mission is to automate the buying and selling of advertising by 
offering innovative products to connect buyers and sellers globally.
www.RubiconProject.com <http://www.rubiconproject.com> @RubiconProject 
#Automation #Excellence #CultureMatters
