
Austria

WINNING TIP: Dienten am Hochkönig

Dienten is a small, traditional Austrian farming village in the middle of the 
Hochkönig ski area. In the past few years there has been a big investment in 
the area's ski infrastructure, with lots of new lifts now linking Dienten to 
the surrounding villages. Despite being only an hour from Salzburg, it is still 
relatively unheard of and prices have been kept low. We stayed over the New 
Year week and never once queued for a lift or battled for space on the 150km of 
pistes. We especially enjoyed numerous beautiful mountain huts serving hearty 
treats and schnapps.
hochkoenig.at <http://www.hochkoenig.at/en>
Gnarbq

Bulgaria

Pamporovo
I visited this lovely Bulgarian Village 17 years ago and loved it and, on my 
return this year, I loved it even more. Pamporovo offers fantastic 
family-friendly skiing and pretty runs allow for all to be involved. The ski 
school is fantastic whether you are a beginner or an expert. It's great value 
for money without feeling budget. Give this resort a chance, especially if you 
are a family considering a first skiing holiday.
winter.pamporovoresort.com <http://winter.pamporovoresort.com/en/>
Julie Catanach Burt

France

 A young on a sled enjoying the snow in Vosges. Photograph: Christophe 
Lehenaff/Getty Images/Photononstop RM 
Vosges mountains
Seven hours drive from Calais, or less than 90 minutes from either Basel or 
Strasbourg, there are plenty of places to ski in the Vosges. It's quite low, so 
snow is not guaranteed, but there are some runs with artificial snow. There are 
also maybe a dozen other places with one or two lifts perfect for a morning's 
skiing. Suitable for intermediate rather than expert skiers (only a couple of 
black runs) they're also ideal if you are a bit rusty and want a quick day or 
two to get back into the swing. Runs are around 2km maximum length, so it's 
great if you're not (ahem) perfectly fit. Prices are reasonable and there are 
plenty of nice cheap places to have lunch (¤10 covers a basic meal).
tourismevosges.fr <http://www.tourismevosges.fr/les-vosges-sports-d-hiver.html>
ExPatJohn

Auron
Auron 1600 is a surprise. Less than two hours from Nice, it captivates you 
with its charming village atmosphere. The skiing is suitable for all the 
family, catering for novice to expertall levels. It's a fantastic journey up to 
the resort, hard to believe that you can be transported from the blueness of 
the Côte d'Azur to the crystal whiteness of the Alpes-Maritime in such a short 
space of time. The food and accommodation isare delightful, with numerous après 
ski activities.
hiver.auron.com
SimonTweed

Le Grand Bornand
Enjoyed by just a small number of British skiers, but loved by the French, Le 
Grand Bornandcorrect is a charming, chocolate box village in the Aravis. The 
smaller neighbour to La Clusazcorrect, and just an hour from Geneva and 35 
minutes from Annecy, the skiing here is fantastic for all the family. You can 
choose a ski pass for Grand Bornand or the full Aravis area with regular buses 
linking the resorts. We never had to queue to get on a lift, the lift operators 
were always friendly and helpful and there's a good choice of restaurants 
around the slopes. My husband, who's an expert skier, loved the skiing here, 
particularly the off-piste - the snowfall we had was amazing. Oour three 
year-old loved learning and, as an intermediate skier, I had no end of choice 
of where to go. The tuition here is also fantastic. We've skied in many other 
places, but love it here - fantastic town, amazing skiing, easy access to 
Annecy for non-skiers, lovely restaurants and chilled apres ski.
legrandbornand.com <http://www.legrandbornand.com/>
RachelB17

Italy
 Snowboarding in Macugnaga. Photograph: Alamy 
Macugnaga
Set at the foot of Monte Rosa, which is itself worth the trip, Macugnaga in 
Piedmont can only be described as a local ski resort. Small in size, it avoids 
the buses of the package holidays yet it has a vibrant feeling thanks to a 
friendly bunch of locals. The skiing is excellent – be the first up to peak 
Moro (3,008m) and enjoy the wide pistes all to yourself. The queues never get 
long and the hot food in the bars is not a rip-off. There is plenty to do for 
all; ice skating, trekking, a spa and the après-ski scene is genuine fun.
macugnaga.it <http://www.macugnaga.it/en/>
razmataz87

Pragelato
Peaceful Pragelato is 90 minutes' drive from Turin airport. On the border of 
the Val Troncea national parkcorrect, it enjoys peace and tranquillity. The Via 
Latteacorrect skiing area is the main attraction, with more than 400km of runs 
but, with the Val Troncea national park so near, there is also plenty of 
walking and snow trekking to be done. One of the legacies from the Turin 2006 
Winter Olympics is a fantastic cross-country skiing network. My family has been 
going to Pragelato for the past 20 years or so, and we have seen the village 
changing through the years and it is lovely to see!
comune.pragelato.to.it <http://www.comune.pragelato.to.it/>
two_mamas

Folgarida
Folgarida is a tiny resort in the Italian Dolomites but benefits from being 
linked to the bigger town of Madonna di Campiglio. It has 28 pistes with a 
total length of 50km but, when added to the Brenta Dolomites slopes, there's 
access to 150km of well-groomed, tree-lined runs. Folgarida itself is very 
quiet on the après side, so it might be better suited to serious skiers or 
families. A beginner/intermediate resort, it has friendly reds and blues but 
has access to more challenging reds and blacks in Madonna. Our favourite was 
the leg-burning Orso Bruno route back from Madonna to Folgarida: 9km without 
any lifts!
visittrentino.it <http://www.visittrentino.it/en/localita/folgarida>
9avin

Switzerland
 The quiet slopes of Obersaxen-Mundaun. Photograph: Stockwerk/Getty Images 
Obersaxen
Obersaxen-Mundaun is a lesser-known but well-sized ski area in Graubünden. 
It's the home of ski champion Carlo Janka, but Obersaxen sees itself as a 
family ski resort and the pistes have something to offer at all skill levels. 
There are several other ski areas nearby for day trips, including Brigels, 
Sedrun and the popular Flims Laax.
KorKhan

Sweden

Björkliden
From Björkliden, a small ski resort deep inside the Arctic circle and under 
the northern lights corridor, you can see the great Lapporten Gap – the gateway 
to Lapland. Cosy cabins, Sweden's highest mountain station (Låktatjåkko) and 
lots of non-skiing activities. You can also ski on the Swedish/Norwegian border 
at Riksgränsen using the transfer bus between the ski areas.
bjorkliden.com <http://www.bjorkliden.com/>
Chris Graham
