
Your new show, Boulton & Co, is being filmed in HD. Isn't that a nightmare?

Actually, I quite like it. James Murdoch says I look five years younger.

You don't worry they're going to bring in some hot 22-year-old or does age 
equal authority in politics?

What? Showbiz for ugly people? I do think there's a cult of youth on a lot of 
terrestrial television. But, so far, touch wood, we've been blessedly isolated 
from that. I have to be honest: sometimes I'm watching the news and I see some 
28-year-old in an anorak going on and I find myself thinking: "What do you 
know, son?" The other problem, of course, is that Obama is younger than me,
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is younger 
than me, Ed Miliband is younger than me, so you're aware you're moving into a 
different sector.…

Don't you find yourself looking at George Osborne 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> and thinking: "When are you 
going back to prep school, laddie?"

No, I remember when Osborne was appointed shadow chancellor and the make-up 
girl said something like: "You're a bit young for this job, aren't you?" And 
Osborne said: "Well, how old was Adam when he became political editor?" I was 
29 and he said: "Well, there's your answer." I don't think that all young 
people are stupid.

Do you sometimes feel like you've seen it all before?

History never repeats itself precisely but I do think that circumstances can 
recur. Is a minister in trouble? Your judgment gets better after you've seen a 
few crises. One quite interesting thing about the return of the Tories – and a 
lot of people in Westminster now aren't old enough to have covered John Major, 
let alone Margaret Thatcher – is that you do see the return of certain traits. 
For example, they're generally more polite and less instinctively hostile 
towards their civil service. They're slightly less paranoid. They do seem to 
feel a greater sense that they were born to govern.

Did you see Ed Miliband <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> 
winning?

I didn't think he would. What I hadn't quite foreseen was that the Labour 
electoral system was so Burmese that you could win in two categories [as David 
Miliband did] and then have a 9% turnout in the last category and still lose. 
If you look back over recent leadership contests, by the end of the campaign 
Blair was a clear standout, Cameron was a clear standout, John Major was a 
clear standout, even – in terms of popularity – William Hague and Iain Duncan 
Smith were the stars of the campaign. And Ed wasn't. I think the Labour party 
has completely lost discipline at the top. The notion of running two brothers 
against each other, or ending up with a shadow cabinet with two sisters, and a 
husband-and-wife team. It's like something out ofCold Comfort Farm.

That was quite a moment, your near-punch-up with Alastair Campbell live on TV 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1gkHwU4DRA8> during the election...

It did capture people's imaginations. But what's fantastic for us at Sky News 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> is when there's a big rolling story 
that people want to know about and they don't know what's going to happen next.

It's not usually up to the correspondents to provide that element of surprise…

It is! As you know, that was a period of uncertainty about the government and 
who was going to form the next government and it was happening minute by 
minute. And when Alastair appeared – who, remember, had no official job – 
saying it was all going to be all right and Gordon was going to save the world, 
I felt very uneasy. If you actually read the transcript, he was conceding the 
points I was making about the party not having met. And he responded by being 
personal on things that he knew were important to me. And I did lose my temper. 
I shouldn't have and I immediately admitted that, apologised for that. Unlike 
Alastair, who went off, tried to start a Twitter campaign against me, and 
phoned people at News International. Which is pathetic.

So you haven't been sent on an anger-management course?

No. Instantaneously, everyone was very supportive. From the point of view of 
my bosses, what Alastair was doing was attacking the integrity of the station.

A lot of people think that you managed the impossible task of making Alastair 
Campbell <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> look sane and 
reasonable.

Well, people can make their own judgment. I wasn't proud about the moment, but 
if you read the transcript or, indeed, if you look at how history evolved, I 
was right. Most people think he's an unpleasant person. Did he succeed in 
winding me up? He did, so good luck to him. Have I seen him since? Yes. Do I 
have a problem with Alastair Campbell? No. Except one of the very big strikes 
against New Labour is that it wasn't a particularly honest government, and do I 
think Alastair Campbell was one of the principal figures responsible? Yes.

Does being married to Tony Blair's former aide Anji Hunter not muddy that 
water?

Look, I know all these people very well. I've written a book 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tonys-Ten-Years-Memories-Administration/dp/1847392725/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1294155324&sr=8-3>
 about what I think about the Blair government. I think there were good things 
and bad things. And most people would say that Anji was one of the good things.

I noticed Mick Hucknall went to your wedding. Does he pop over for a cup of 
tea?

He does. I like knowing people outside the political world, and I think that 
people with other jobs like knowing people in the political world.

Andrew Marr called you a "political nutter". Is that a compliment?

In a way, because I'm not a political animal – someone who's involved in the 
political process and who ultimately aspires to take sides. Whereas someone who 
doesn't feel like that but who spends as much time as I do studying politics 
probably is a bit nutty.

What's the post-political editor's dream? Are you going to be sheep farming in 
Tuscany?

No. My ambition would be to have people for the next 10 to 15 years still 
trusting me and wanting to watch me. I love television. I love television news. 
I love reporting on politics.



Boulton & Co will broadcast every weekday from 1-2pm on Sky News
