
The dilemma I met a guy on a dating site about a month ago and made the 
mistake of sleeping with him on the third date. I thought he was too good to be 
true – even after sleeping with me he would call, send me messages... Recently 
he invited me to go on a weekend getaway with his friends. It was pretty good, 
and he kept checking up on me, which was great. But when we got back he got mad 
at me for wanting to know what is going on between us. He told me he is not 
looking to rush into a relationship. I don’t know how to handle this, so I 
said: “OK cool” and haven’t contacted him, and neither has he contacted me. 
It’s been two days. My thinking is to walk away gracefully. What should I do?

Mariella replies Two whole days! I’m not minimising your emotional pain, but 
could you be slightly overreacting? Before the era of instant communication, 
people waited months to receive missives from their beloved ones, depending on 
their location, occupation and station in life. A small disagreement could lead 
to long periods languishing in Siberian-style silence with no telephone, text 
or email with which to proffer impulsive, immediate resolution. Even more 
recently, before the advent of mobiles, days and even weeks might slide past 
agonisingly slowly as you waited for that welcoming orange light on your 
answering machine that signalled you were back in demand. The notion of a 
disagreement having to be resolved within 48 hours would have been a total 
anathema. Not that I’m proposing a return to those days, but would it be 
entirely out of the question for us to carve out some thinking space?

I’m pretty certain your guy has already called by now, so I’m not writing to 
advise on whether to “walk away gracefully” or not. You’ve had a pleasing 
adventure with a suitor you solicited, so less of the hand-wringing. Asking 
after three weeks where the relationship is going seems premature, even in this 
age of instant gratification. Not that I’m impressed with his answer – 
declaring uncertainty about relationships per se, when he’s already to all 
intents and purposes embarked on one, is unchivalrous and immature.

I’m more worried, though, about some of the other sentiments you express, and 
in particular gratitude. You are surprised that “even” having slept with him he 
called you. Why on earth wouldn’t you expect him to? Back in the dark days of 
the last century girls who “did it” without too much persuasion were designated 
“easy” and girls who didn’t were regarded as holding a trump card. But surely 
that was because men and women still hadn’t fully embraced the notion of 
equality, which we now accept as a basic human right – one that includes 
licence to have sex when you feel like it, not just when you can’t bear to hold 
out any longer. Your letter could have been written by an 18-year-old me back 
in the early 80s, when girls were still expected to resist as hard as Jane 
Austen heroines while men were compelled to push themselves upon us with 
everything short of brute force. In the intervening three decades the world 
order is supposed to have shifted significantly when it comes to sex and 
relationships.

Endless newspaper articles extol this brave new world of sexual equality in 
which girls are just as game for carnality without strings as boys. Yet on the 
basis of what you’re saying the rules have changed little, apart from the speed 
at which they’re expected to produce results. Your checklist is interesting. He 
looked out for you when you were among his friends; he called after sex. It 
perturbs me that you sound grateful for his care and attention, when frankly 
what he’s displaying are the baseline requirements of courtesy and civility.

My best friend, who’s Italian, used to decry the disgraceful conduct of 
British men, declaring it ungentlemanly not to call and express gratitude 
following a date. At the time I thought she was stuck in a time warp and a 
victim of her country’s strict traditional values. With hindsight I agree with 
her. Calling after a date and especially after sex is simply good manners; 
whether you ever call again is a different matter.

Etiquette aside, keeping a checklist of the positives isn’t a bad idea, but 
interrogating this new lover on his future plans when you’re barely off first 
base must have struck him as a bit needy. What’s your hurry anyway? If the 
stirrings of passion aren’t irrational, unpredictable and full of highs and 
lows you might as well stop looking for Mr Right and settle for Mr Reliable, 
which might be who you’re after... The search for a compatible partner can’t be 
conducted at speed or to an agenda, or in expectation of conclusive results to 
your strict timeline. Relax, enjoy yourself, take responsibility for your 
choices and don’t shower anyone in gratitude for basic good manners. Whether 
it’s this mate or the next, adopting a more laissez-faire attitude to emotional 
results will reap far bigger dividends than when you demand them.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
