
The popular image of the artistic endeavour isn’t necessarily one of 
rationality and order, but nobody would ever describe Mozart – who some 
researchers suggest had autism – as uncreative. People with autism can and do 
thrive in the arts. Take, for example, the architectural artist Stephen 
Wiltshire, known for his ability to draw incredible landscapes from memory; or 
Menswe@r frontman Johnny Dean, who was diagnosed in later life.

Award-winning artist Jon Adams is a fellow of the Royal Society of Arts and an 
artist in residence at Portsmouth University. Adams has Asperger Syndrome, a 
condition on the autism spectrum, and also experiences synaesthesia.


Adams – who uses sound, drawings, poetry, photography and science to create 
his art – believes that autism and artistic talent can be very closely linked. 
“My autism lets me see and experience and touch the world in a very different 
way to someone without autism. I experience the world through different 
filters, different eyes,” he says.


Adams says it’s impossible for his autism not to affect his work. “It’s not 
separate so it must inform every bit of the work I do, even at an unconscious 
level. I make work touching sound, finding patterns and observations from my 
life all woven together as one.” He feels it may even give him an advantage: 
“It’s both my downfall and my creative edge,” he says.


Adams is currently working on a project called Democracy Street, commissioned 
by the Speaker’s Art Fund, which creates maps of the UK based on user-generated 
content. “I’m doing it on my terms, not someone else’s. I was commissioned by 
them because of my autism, because of my skill of sifting through a lot of 
information and finding and illustrating patterns.”


One thing that irritates Adams, though, is that he still gets the Rain Man 
comments: “When you mention your Asperger’s people expect you to count matches 
or do a Rubik’s cube in three seconds.” He adds: “I think savantism is almost a 
cult with the general public. You must have some sort of superpower or you’re 
no use.”


Comedy calling

One field of artistic endeavour in which you might be especially surprised to 
find an autistic person is comedy. Yet after just a year of stand-up, the 
comedian, writer and radio presenter Jay Islaam beat 100 other new comedians to 
be named Breakthrough Act 2014, and in 2015 he was a semi-finalist for English 
Comedian of the Year and runner-up for Joker of the Year.

Islaam admits that his autism can present difficulties: “You need to be able 
to read the mood of a room,” he says, “which is a challenge that I fail to meet 
sometimes. And the ability to respond to, and effectively deal with, hecklers 
is also a regular obstacle comedians face that I have seen people with ASD 
struggle to cope with.”


Islaam’s autism means he’s not so worried about fitting in with social norms. 
And this can be an unexpected bonus for an edgy comic: “I can find humour in 
some very dark subjects – national or international tragedies, for example. But 
that often also means I’m out of step with the wider mood of the audience.


I don’t think that any of the autistic comedians I’ve met have been put off 
performing by stereotypes. There are plenty of challenges that will put you 
off. But I believe some people are born to be painters, or writers, or actors 
and nothing, not even autism, will put them off their calling. Similarly, some 
people are born to solve equations, or invent amazing devices, or write code 
and nothing will stop them in pursuing their calling.”


Too Much Information: a National Autistic Society campaign

Like most people with an autistic spectrum disorder, both Islaam and Adams can 
experience “too much information” – it’s as though they lack a filter, and can 
become overwhelmed with “too much, too fast”. “It can make us appear, wrongly, 
stupid,” Adams says, adding: “and it can take away from creativity.”

Islaam’s forthcoming comedy tour, Travels With Autism, directly addresses the 
issue of how he is affected by this phenomenon. “Being forced to deal with 
unfamiliar people, environments and cultures can be a living hell for anyone on 
the autistic spectrum,” he explains.


“One of the main problems is we’re expected to fit in with a landscape that’s 
been created by people who don’t have the sensory or social issues that we do,” 
says Adams. “Instead of adjusting their view of the world to enable us, they 
expect us to fit in and we just can’t do that.”


Discover how you can help: meet 10-year-old Alex 
<http://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/autism-and-the-overload-effect>, 
star of the National Autistic Society’sToo Much Information film 
<http://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/experience-the-world-through-an-autistic-boys-eyes-video>


To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
www.autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
