
Netflix <http://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> is unquestionably an 
internet-era success story. From a domestic US DVD rental business to a global 
leader in on-demand entertainment in just 20 years is quite something. The 
numbers are undeniably impressive. Some 79 million subscribers, 192 countries, 
billions of dollars in revenues and here in Britain from zero to five million 
subscribing households in just four years. Throw in the company’s growing 
commitment to creating original content of the highest quality – something many 
observers never thought it would manage – and it’s unarguably a huge 
achievement.

I’ll bet there are few traditional TV executives who haven’t felt the chill 
wind of the “Netflix effect”, or rather the jitters about the damage the 
service might do to their linear TV businesses. Meanwhile Netflix has talked up 
the existential threat it sees itself posing to traditional TV. On its website 
Netflix says, “People love TV content but they don’t love the linear TV 
experience…” It forecasts the certain death of traditional TV, a process in 
which, Netflix says, it is the leading player. They say it’s a revolutionary 
change as significant in historical terms as the invention of TV itself.

But are consumers really moving decisively away from linear TV to embrace 
on-demand instead? And does Netflix, for all its considerable achievements, 
have a sustainable business model strong enough to see off the challenges it is 
facing not least from the big beasts of traditional TV?

In the US, where pay-TV penetration is perhaps amongst the highest in the 
world, with many millions of people signed up to expensive long-term cable TV 
contracts, Netflix has managed to persuade millions of people to switch to its 
relatively low-cost, one month at a time, unlimited (“all you can eat”) 
service. But the same is not true in the UK. Here the majority of Netflix 
subscribers are also subscribers to Sky or Virgin pay TV services – neither of 
which appear to have lost customers as a result. Which suggests that Netflix is 
being taken up mainly by people who see it as a complement to what they already 
get rather than a replacement.

And when you look at consumption patterns a similar picture emerges. Whereas 
Netflix generates on average roughly 38 minutes of viewing per day in 
households that have it, linear TV generates more like 3.5 hours of viewing per 
household on average and well over 2 hours a day even amongst the younger, 
so-called “Netflix generation”. A billion hours streamed by Netflix compares to 
65 billion hours streamed (ok, broadcast…) by linear TV. And although Netflix 
offers a great service – simple, smart, easy to use and relatively inexpensive, 
and although some of its original programming is getting widely talked about 
and often praised for its quality, t here is little to suggest that people are, 
as yet, doing anything more revolutionary than adding it to their existing TV 
diet.

Meanwhile, the costs of its huge global expansion have been, as the company 
admits, substantial. And the amount spent on content overall is reported to be 
up around the $10bn mark – with some $1.4bn of that accounted for by original 
commissions – including the £100m series The Crown about the British royal 
family.

One reason to doubt Netflix’s ability to overturn the existing order is its 
strategic vulnerability. Original content is eye-catching and plainly a real 
draw for subscribers, but the Netflix service is still hugely dependent on 
movies and TV series that have to be licensed from the big players in 
traditional TV. In that world two factors are at play that do not go in 
Netflix’s favour.

First, all of those established players already have internet-based on-demand 
services of their own – think BBC iPlayer, BBC Store, Hulu, Sky Now and so on. 
And in the case of Sky there are lucrative deals already in place with 
Hollywood studios, HBO and Showtime that effectively deny Netflix access to 
attractive content. Secondly, the more successful Netflix becomes the more 
those rights holders will try to make it pay for their content – something that 
is already creating a real squeeze on its margins. And that is before anyone 
mentions other very deep-pocketed players such as Amazon.

It’s hard to see exactly how all this will play out. On-demand viewing is now 
part of many people’s TV lives and will doubtless continue to grow. But its 
impact on traditional broadcasters such as the BBC may be much more limited 
than they fear – and almost certainly less than Netflix hopes.
