
Downing Street is warning that migrant encampments like the Calais Jungle 
could spring up in Kent and other parts of the south-east if the UK votes to 
leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

The Vote Leave campaign has accused David Cameron of scaremongering, saying 
border security arrangements with France have “nothing to do with our EU 
membership”.

So who is right? Is Cameron scaremongering in the most lurid way, or is it a 
realistic precis of the situation?

The legal history

 The “juxtaposed controls” under which British border force officers carry out 
passport checks in France and Belgium were first introduced in 1994 under the 
bilateral Sangatte protocol to speed up entry and exit procedures on the 
Channel Tunnel route.


They were extended to Eurostar in 2001 and to the ferry ports in 2003 to 
counter the number of people without papers arriving in Dover and claiming 
asylum. The ferry checks were enshrined in the 2003 Treaty of Le Touquet. Under 
these arrangements British border guards carry out passport checks as far away 
as Brussels Midi station. Less well known is the fact that French border police 
also operate at Dover under the treaty, checking all passengers going to Calais 
or Dunkirk.

So this has nothing to do with EU treaties or policy, and everything to do 
with bilateral agreements that would exist whether Britain was in or out of the 
EU?

Yes, but the French are not very keen on the arrangement and don’t understand 
why the then interior minister, Nicholas Sarkozy, signed up to it when David 
Blunkett, the British home secretary at the time, negotiated it back in 2003. 
The current French interior minister, Bernard Cazeneuve, hinted on Monday that 
France would give two years’ notice to end the arrangement if Britain voted to 
leave: “It is obvious that leaving the EU will always result in 
countermeasures,” he said on Monday.

Those leading the calls to scrap the treaty have been the outspoken mayor of 
Calais, newspaper Le Monde, former ministers, and the French national 
commission on human rights, who argue that this “one-sided tangle of treaties” 
in contradiction of EU law has led to France “becoming the police arm of 
British migration policy”.

Rob Whiteman, the former head of the UK Border Agency, set out the background: 
“I think at the time the French felt there would be an upside for them, in that 
if it was clear that people could not easily get to Britain it would stop 
Sangatte building up again. The camp was closed. But history has shown that not 
to be the case. The French authorities still have a huge amount of pressure on 
their side. And now the Jungle, as it is called, has developed. So there is not 
much upside for the French.”

But the French government, helped by regular payments from London towards the 
costs of policing Calais and the camps, has kept the arrangement in place and 
now says that even more refugees and migrants would head for the French Channel 
ports if they thought it was easier get into Britain.

This is because the Jungle and other camps on the north French coast have been 
set up by refugees and migrants trying to get to Britain to claim asylum. They 
do not want to claim asylum in France, often because they speak English, have 
relatives in the UK, or believe Britain is less hostile towards asylum seekers 
than France.

So if the border moved back to Dover would migrant camps spring up in 
Folkestone or near other south-eastern ports?

No. Those who reached Dover would be able to claim asylum. They would then 
either be dispersed outside London and the south-east or, if it was thought 
they would abscond, put into a immigration detention centre while their claims 
were considered.

How many would come? 

Whiteman says UK asylum claims fell from 80,000 a year in 2003 to 30,000 a 
year now as a result of the arrangements, so it is likely the flow of asylum 
seekers would increase to Britain without the juxtaposed controls.


The most likely scenario is that Dover immigration removal centre, which is 
currently scheduled for closure, would have to be reopened and probably 
expanded. An immigration detention centre is also likely to be needed near St 
Pancras station where the Eurostar terminates.

Verdict

Cameron is scaremongering when he implies Brexit would necessarily lead to a 
mass invasion of asylum seekers from Calais to Kent because the current 
bilateral agreements have nothing to do with the EU.


There is however a risk that France could end the treaty as a “countermeasure” 
to Britain leaving the EU, but if that occurred it would be two years before it 
took effect.

 It is highly unlikely thatmigrant camps à la the Jungle would be set up in 
the south-east as new asylum seekers in Britain are either dispersed to Home 
Office funded accommodation or held in immigration removal centres.
