
You never know where you are with television chefs and design experts. One 
minute they're saying, oh yes, you must make all your own mincemeat and hand 
crimp the party streamers. Then, in the comfort of their private lives, they 
are doing exactly the opposite. This is a nation that has never recovered from 
the news that, instead of spending Advent with her arm stuck up a turkey in 
Suffolk, Delia Smith likes to spend Christmases in the Caribbean. Martha 
Stewart urged everyone to make gingerbread houses when she was actually in a 
gingerbread jail and even Nigella has reneged on her non-negotiable Christmas 
credo. Once it was turkey and all the trimmings or else. Now she's saying it's 
OK to have pizza and curry sauce instead. Could everyone make their minds up, 
please? Do we bother with the complicated canapés and traditional puds or not? 
Judging by the example they all set, I would say not.

For Christmas is the one time of year when the ordinary Joe in his ordinary 
domestic kitchen has to somehow morph into a professional cook with a large and 
spanking restaurant to match. And face a demanding bunch of regulars who have 
looked forward to this meal all year and will only accept the best. Quite 
possibly, they will all be roaring drunk and in a highly emotional state, too.

It should be simple. Basically the whole Christmas thing is just Sunday lunch 
plus chestnuts and a paper hat apiece, no? Unfurl the streamers, set fire to a 
pudding and ignore most of Nigella and Jamie's complicated exhortations? What's 
the big deal? Readers, you know what the big deal is. It is the numbers. We are 
just not trained to cook for what always seems like hundreds of people.

For us, the few people left in this country who are not actually celebrity 
chefs, the whole day is a bit of a roasting, steaming nightmare. We have no 
experience of mass catering. By about 4pm on the 25th, however, we quite 
understand the impulses behind mass murder.

Be honest. We don't know what to do when two dozen rellies descend en masse 
and start to complain about the smoked-salmon starter and demanding constant 
cocktail refills as if they were parched refugees who had just crawled across 
the Gobi on their empty bellies. Or keep asking if they can watch Top of the 
Pops and the Queen's speech instead of sitting at the table. Look. Le Gavroche 
doesn't have to put up with that sort of nonsense. Ask for the telly to be 
switched on at Corrigan's and you'd be out on your ear with the chef's turkey 
baster shoved where the sun don't shine. Clue: not your armpit.

No wonder mayhem ensues. One day, you are heating up a pizza in your slippers, 
moaning that there's no milk in the fridge and who ate the last digestive 
biscuit anyway. Next, your reservations book is full, a party of 26 and a dog 
is booked in for 2pm and someone is screaming from your armchair that they 
ordered a cup of tea over an hour ago, and can they see the manager, please?

Well, fear not. If your house, like millions across the country, has suddenly 
turned into a seasonal restaurant, it makes sense to apply proper restaurant 
rules to the proceedings. So first, get a cloakroom going. Put a big dish of 
coins and fivers in front of the coats so that people get the right idea. Then, 
establish the identity of the most sullen, rude and bad-tempered friend or 
member of your family. Place them behind a bookings desk which you have 
installed by your front door. When your cherry-cheeked Christmas guests arrive, 
it is imperative that your new receptionist does not issue them with a festive 
greeting, or even say hello. 'Have you booked?' is the only acceptable opener, 
complete with much sighing and teeth-sucking as the bookings list is 
scrutinised. Unless they are minor celebrities or once appeared in The Bill, 
make sure they are sitting in the worst seats of the house.

Most important. Part roast and prepare everything a few days beforehand and 
reheat on the day. I love the smell of a napalmed microwave on Christmas 
morning. Of course, the food won't taste nearly as good and your turkey gravy 
will be the temperature of Baffin Bay, but what do these people expect for £25 
a head, plus cracker and free glass of mulled wine? Hire some really clumsy oaf 
to lean over everyone throughout the meal and top up their water and wine so 
that their glasses are permanently a-brim. The oaf must then ask the following 
question at least every 15 minutes. 'Another bottle? Another bottle? Another 
bottle?'

Plonk your bill on the table when everyone is still wolfing down your brandy 
butter. Tell Grandma that service is not included, even when it is. Lunch might 
be rubbish, but at least this year you might make a profit! Merry Christmas!

Three restaurants where you can enjoy Christmas

Corrigan's
Mayfair, 28 Upper Grosvenor Street, London W1, 020 7499 9943

Cosy, clubby restaurant handy for West End shopping. The emphasis is on game, 
wild fish and seafood, shot through with the kind of rootsy Irish sensibility 
that is the hallmark of Richard Corrigan's brilliant cooking. Or just have a 
glass of champagne and a plate of excellent smoked salmon from Sally Barnes's 
Woodcock Smokery in West Cork.

Bocca Di Lupo 
12 Archer Street, London W1, 020 7734 2223

Tremendous new pantomime bolthole near West End theatres. Lovely Italian food, 
served in small or large portions to encourage sharing. Eat at the big marble 
counter or in the small dining room - fritto di mare, fresh porcini, deep-fried 
artichokes, and lots of silky pasta.

Haandi 
136 Brompton Road, London SW3, 020 7823 7373

Terrific Indian restaurant, good for a break from Knightsbridge Christmas 
shopping. Light, spicy food includes khaju til rolls - vegetable cakes filled 
with cashew nuts and mint.

• These restaurants and hundreds more are on Jan's restaurant website, 
areyoureadytoorder.co.uk <http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk>
