
As you stroll along the formal paths of Hampton Court Palace’s famous Privy 
garden, among neat box plants and pruned yew trees, it’s easy to imagine that 
this elegant royal setting has remained unaltered for centuries.

But as a fascinating new exhibition shows, Hampton Court has changed with the 
times. And after the legendary Lancelot “Capability” Brown became chief 
gardener at the palace in 1764, it seems the trees at Hampton Court became so 
straggly that some of them even started sporting very odd-looking topknots, 
thanks in no small part to his famed naturalistic approach to landscaping.


Related: Countryphile: what Catherine the Great loved about English gardens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/exhibition-hampton-court-palace/2016/may/31/countryphile-what-catherine-the-great-loved-about-english-gardens>

It’s one of many startling glimpses from the past on display in The Empress 
and the Gardener 
<http://www.hrp.org.uk/hampton-court-palace/visit-us/top-things-to-see-and-do/the-empress-and-the-gardener/>
, a fascinating exhibition showing previously unseen 18th-century drawings of 
Hampton Court Palace and its gardens on show to celebrate 300 years since 
Brown’s birth.

The drawings themselves have a strange history: they were part of a collection 
sold to Russia’s Catherine the Great by one of Brown’s assistants, John Spyers; 
and until recently the collection lay forgotten in the State Hermitage Museum 
in St Petersburg, formerly Catherine’s Winter Palace.


Now, though, these diverting illustrations are on display for the first time 
until 4 September at Hampton Court – in a rare chance to catch a glimpse of 
what life was like at a royal palace in the Georgian era.

George III decided not to live at the palace, so, despite the presence in the 
images of courtiers and coachmen, there is a somewhat informal air about the 
palace and gardens in Spyers’ drawings.


Looking east towards the Great Fountain garden, for example, there’s no sign 
of the mushroom-shaped formal trees that are one of the most notable features 
of the garden today. Instead, the old topiary grows tall and unconfined.

Yet as the exhibition shows, Brown – whose speciality was ripping out the 
formal gardens of the landed gentry and replacing them with “naturalistic” 
landscapes – resisted any urge to obliterate the manicured features at Hampton 
Court, telling George III (according to a guidebook written after his death) 
that the gardens “appear to the best advantage in their present state”.


As Spyers’ drawings show, that meant keeping the formal path structure but 
letting trees outgrow their constraints, with bedraggled, if charming, results.

“What were very formal, clipped gardens, with yew trees always kept at about 
six feet high, were let to grow out a bit – taller and shaggier,” says 
exhibition curator Sebastian Edwards. “This was a sign of the times.


“If you compare these with images from 20 or so years before, where it still 
looks trimly maintained, there must have been a decision to stop pruning.”

Visit the exhibition and you’ll have the chance to judge for yourself whether 
Brown’s efforts were successful – while comparing the Hampton Court of 
yesteryear with the Hampton Court of today.


Today’s Wilderness, for example, where you can relax on a sunny day under 
dappled shade, was much more formal in the 18th century, as shown in Spyers’ 
drawings. But the formality didn’t extend much further than that: the 
exhibition notes that Brown, who lived on the grounds in Wilderness House, kept 
turkeys there.


Changes in Hampton Court’s surroundings are also notable. One image of the 
Lion Gate – which now stands on a busy road – depicts it as part of a rural 
scene, with a fork in a country lane.

Another illustration, showing cattle grazing on a small island on the river 
Ember, with the palace in the background, depicts what is now the site of 
Hampton Court railway station.


As a modern-day visitor, the exhibition also offers you the chance to try your 
hand at drawing views in pencil – allowing you to see if you can draw images of 
Hampton Court and its gardens that can stand up to Spyers’ own.

“We hope that people will see the garden and palace with new eyes,” says 
Edwards, “and think about this lost past.”


The Empress and the Gardener 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/304155071;133262059;s> is now open and runs 
till 4 September 2016.Admission is included as part of a ‘Palace, Maze and 
Gardens’ ticket at Hampton Court Palace.
