
Scott on Peter

What were you hoping for?
Good chat, laughter, a spark.

First impressions?
Tardy. Pete was 45 minutes late: he got lost at the tube.

What did you talk about?
Classic 90s TV shows such as Challenge Anneka 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/may/15/channel5.broadcasting>, our big 
30th birthday parties, the fact that I’m in a dodgeball team, plus plenty of 
innuendo.

Any awkward moments?
Nope. The night flew by.

Good table manners?
Yes. We had nibbles first and both just used our hands.

Best thing about Peter?
He’s a good conversationalist, has a nice smile and a wide-ranging vocabulary.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
Yes, he would fit in well.

Describe him in three words
Intelligent, cheeky, confident.

What do you think he made of you?
Someone easy to talk to, who doesn’t take life too seriously and is up for an 
adventure.

Did you go on somewhere?
Home, alone. It was pretty late when we finished (they had cleaned the kitchen 
and were waiting to leave) and we both had work the next day.

And… did you kiss?
A quick peck on the cheek. For a first date, that’s sufficient.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
Move it to a Friday, so we could have gone on.

Marks out of 10?
7. It would have been 8 if he hadn’t been late.

Would you meet again?
We’ve exchanged numbers, so we’ll see what happens.

Peter on Scott

What were you hoping for?
Good company, good food and good wine. I got all three.

First impressions?
Wearing a suit – always a plus.

What did you talk about?
Food, music, TV, sport, travel.

Any awkward moments?
Me arriving late.

Good table manners?
Very good. While I made a veggie watch me eat meat.

Best thing about Scott?
He was forthright but also interested in what I had to say.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
If this was going somewhere serious, or if they wanted to know about dodgeball.

Describe him in three words
Eclectic, enthusiastic, easy-going.

What do you think he made of you?
Late. Which is not me at all.

Did you go on somewhere?
He walked me to the tube (so I didn’t get lost again).

And… did you kiss?
A peck on the cheek.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I’d be on time.

Marks out of 10?
7 – as a teacher I never give full marks, so 70% is a win.

Would you meet again?
Yes. It’s good to see someone in daylight as well as at dusk!

• Scott and Peter ate at Urban Coterie <http://www.urbancoterie.co.uk/>, City 
Road, London EC1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com <>

For a free three-day trial, go to soulmates.theguardian.com 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/>
