
Every morning, as dawn breaks across the shimmering blue mountains of Kenya's 
Great Rift Valley, a series of shadowy figures assemble at the various training 
camps dotted around the town of Iten. Gradually, some in clusters, some alone, 
they slip away for the first of the day's extended runs.

Ten years ago, these young athletes would have dreamed of winning gold medals 
on the track – but those days are long gone. The marathon has always been the 
holy grail for every distance runner, but it used to be the discipline they 
turned to once their track speed had faded. Nowadays, the financial rewards 
offered by the big city meets mean the marathon attracts the world's finest 
endurance specialists at the very peak of their powers. Perhaps one day, one of 
them will shatter one of sport's most imposing barriers: the sub-two-hour 
marathon.

The very idea of it appears almost inconceivable: 26.2 miles in 120 minutes, 
requiring an average speed of 13.1mph, something most of us would struggle to 
manage for 400m. "When I look at a two-hour marathon from a pacing and a 
physiological perspective, right now it seems really unlikely," saysDavid 
Epstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/22/sports-gene-david-epstein-review>
, the bestselling author of The Sports Gene.

"A guy would need to have as high an oxygen capacity as has ever been 
recorded, and the best running economy [how efficiently you use oxygen while 
running at a given pace]. Those two things almost never seem to come together. 
And from a pacing standpoint, the elite guys usually run the first half of a 
marathon 2.5-3 minutes faster than the second half. So they'd have to run the 
first 13 miles significantly faster than has ever been done before."

Back in September, Kenya's Wilson Kipsang lowered the world record to 2:03:23 
in Berlin. On the face of it, we would appear to be tantalisingly close – but 
then you have to consider that the record has only dropped by two minutes over 
the past 14 years.

Ethiopian distance king Haile Gebrselassie won two golds on the track before 
turning to the marathon at 29 and twice breaking the world record in his 30s. 
He believes that it may well take another 25 years before we see anyone capable 
of going under two hours. Uganda's Stephen Kiprotich, though, the current 
Olympic and world champion, believes there's room for optimism.

"Lowering the record to 2:02 will be done soon, definitely before the next 
Olympics in Rio," he said. "Then it will again take some time. The sub-two-hour 
marathon will happen, but it's impossible to set a timeline. But the good thing 
is that in the past few years, training camps in Africa have professionalised a 
lot. When I was a teenager we just trained; now I have a coach, a physio, a 
manager, a GPS watch. We have people during long runs who assist with drinks to 
simulate drinking station situations. All these things make a difference. But 
we still have lot of room to improve if you compare our training camps with 
some of the European and American runners. They have a lot of technology and 
knowledge we don't have."

Epstein believes that the feat is beyond the current generation, and suggests 
it may not even happen within our lifetime. Such are the physiological 
challenges that ultimately it will come down to the evolution of our genes.

"The faster the races are getting, the more people are ruled out purely 
because of their genetics," he said. "Oxygen capacity is what sets the pros 
aside from everyone else in the field, but what separates the pros from each 
other is usually running economy, and that's largely something that you're born 
with. You can improve what you have through working hard – and Paula Radcliffe 
was a great example of that. She improved her running economy with altitude 
training and she lost weight while she was still growing. However, there's 
still a certain body type that you naturally need to have, and of course you 
have to combine that with ferocious training."

But would it be possible to spot a runner with the ideal genetic makeup and 
nurture their potential from an early age? A lot depends on how the genes are 
expressed, which is one of the most fascinating and little understood areas in 
medical science.

"There's a lot of theory that living in a certain way turns the genes on and 
off, based on what the parents did when they were forming their germline DNA," 
Epstein explains. "This means what your mother was doing when she's pregnant 
with you and what your father was doing when he was going into puberty.

"But otherwise it's sort of unknown. I think there are certain lifestyle 
factors, specifically relating to runners in Kenya. A lot of them are primed 
for training, because they're not overweight and they grew up running, so they 
can start training really quickly instead of having to start by jogging. The 
first sub-two-hour marathon will probably be run by someone from east Africa."

We may have a while to wait, but whoever becomes the first to stop the clock 
at 1:59:59 will have accomplished one of the most significant achievements in 
sport. "It will be a great milestone and an indicator of what the human body 
can do," says Kiprotich's coach Patrick Sang. "It will show that what is 
impossible, can be possible."

Epstein believes that, in some ways, it may have a greater impact than the 
four-minute mile. "That was obviously huge, and part of the psychological 
rebuilding of post-war Britain," he said. "But the sport was also contained to 
a very small portion of the world at that point. Not that many people were 
competing in running, and not many countries recognised the mile in the same 
way that the United States and Britain do. But everyone recognises the marathon 
distance, and it's a globally competitive sport. The marathon has never been 
more popular – it's the greatest participator sport that we have going right 
now – so I think a lot of people could really relate to what it means."
