
I love spring for all the obvious stuff: exuberant birdsong, dancing 
daffodils, warm breezes and all that. I also love the more domestic, perhaps 
prosaic signs: washing on a line, thrown-open windows, the sounds of families 
in their gardens again, that sitting room window down the road groaning with 
tomato seedlings, every year, packed full, just like mine.

We windowsill propagators all dream of warm greenhouses, but for many reasons 
(not leastenvironmental 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/feb/11/its-time-to-power-down-our-greenhouses>
) these may remain pipe dreams. Back on your windowsill, there are a few things 
to help your seedlings along.

First, spin those seedlings round (like a record, baby 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PGNiXGX2nLU>). Seedlings grown on a windowsill 
always grow leggy, because there is only one source of direct light. Turning 
the pot or seed tray before they become the leaning tower of Pisa will prevent 
weak growth.

If you do find they are all legs and nothing else, when you pot them on, drop 
them. Or, put another way, pot them right the way up to their baby leaves, 
burying the leggy stem. The magic of plant cells means that, in time, the stem 
will turn to roots. You can do this several times, if necessary. Do not firm 
the soil around the stem, because that will damage it; instead, gently water 
the compost around the seedlings, preferably using a rose on a watering can, 
topping up with more compost.

If you are using propagator lids, clear plastic bags or shower caps to lock 
the moisture in, do air the seedlings regularly: hot, humid environments can 
cause fatal moulds to fester. A chopstick or something similar will keep the 
bag from resting on the leaves, which can cause scorching.

Competition at the beginning of a seedling’s life is a given, but too much and 
everyone suffers, particularly if they are fighting for light. Once the 
seedlings are big enough to handle, pot them on. If you’ve sown more than you 
need and don’t have time to pot them on, use scissors or your thumb and finger 
to thin out the excess. Cutting seedlings at soil level, rather than yanking 
them out, is preferable, because that way you won’t disturb the roots of the 
neighbours you want to keep.

Related: Alys Fowler: my guide to pots 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/26/alys-fowler-pots-advice> 

Repotting on a warm, sunny day can cause transplant shock, when a seedling 
collapses after being potted on because the roots can’t settle and suck up 
water in time to compensate for respiration: if temperatures are too high, they 
can kill in a matter of hours. Keep your seedlings out of the sun for a few 
hours, so they can adjust.

Make sure you water well after transplanting, but do not keep watering them if 
they droop – you’re just drowning your darlings. Move them out of the sun 
somewhere cool and be patient: they will be upright again in a couple of hours.

Finally, stroke your seedlings. Out in the real world, the wind and rain would 
shake the little plants, causing them to send out roots to stabilise 
themselves. A gentle brush does the same thing and can improve flavour.
