
An attempt by the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> to challenge Britain’s 
right to deny some EU migrants access to child benefit and child tax credits is 
expected to be thrown out by European judges.

The ruling from the European court of justice is expected to confirm that 
Britain can insist that only EU citizens with a lawful “right of residence” in 
the UK can claim social security benefits.

The European commission claimed that the decision by Britain to impose a right 
of residence test to access certain family benefits amounted to direct 
discrimination against citizens of other EU member states.

The ruling is expected to the first of several legal challenges to Britain’s 
attempt to curb what David Cameron has called “benefit tourism” and restrict 
the impact of the EU’s freedom of movement rules on the UK.

The Polish government and others are expected to challenge Cameron’s emergency 
brake mechanism, under which new EU migrants will be denied access to in-work 
welfare benefits and tax credits during their first four years in the UK.

The right to residence test is based on an EU directive that says a citizen of 
another EU state has the right to live in Britain for more than three months 
only if they are in work or self-employed, or have sufficient resources and 
comprehensive health insurance so that they are not a burden on the social 
security system.

The European commission argued to Europe’s most senior court that the simple 
fact of habitual residence in another EU state should be enough to qualify for 
family welfare support. They argued that otherwise some EU citizens could be 
left without any family support despite the fact they live in the EU and have 
dependent children.

But in a preliminary opinion, the court’s advocate-general, Pedro Cruz 
Villalon, said last October that the commission’s challenge should be 
dismissed. He said that although the right to residence test could be regarded 
as indirect discrimination, it could be justified by the need to protect 
Britain’s public finances.

Marley Morris, of the Institute of Public Policy Research, said he expected 
the court to back Britain’s position. “Barring a major upset, the European 
court of justice’s decision [on Tuesday] is likely to back the UK’s right to 
reside test. This is another sign – on top of other recent [European court of 
justice] judgments – that it is becoming more sympathetic to the UK’s 
interpretation of free movement rules,” he said.

“But there are no guarantees that this will last forever, and future judgments 
may go against the UK. Conversely, avote for Brexit on 23 June 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/12/lead-the-eu-dont-leave-gordon-brown-launches-labour-push-for-remain>
 is likely to create its own legal quagmire, as the subsequent negotiations 
will have to resolve the free movement rights of EU citizens currently living 
in the UK and UK citizens currently living in other EU countries in a fair and 
consistent way.”
