
Running a successful charity can sometimes feel like a balancing act between 
being innovative and minimising risk, and this is particularly true when it 
comes to finance. In this discussion, we will debate the idea of securing your 
financial future by balancing the risks and opportunities of spending vs. 
saving.

We will discuss the  risks of borrowing money or using reserves, and explore 
whether this the right economic climate to consider a loan.
We're also interested in hearing your thoughts and experiences, particularly 
where and how you would want to invest and why you believe this would create 
long term security for your business. 

This Q&A will consider:
 
• What areas of your business would benefit from investment - and how would 
this secure your future financially?

• What financial options are available?

• What can we learn from organisations who have invested in their future, 
despite difficult economic circumstances?

• What are the risks and opportunities associated with borrowing or using 
reserves to fund future plans?

• Is this the right economic climate to consider investing in the future? 
 
Join us on Thursday 27 February to ask the experts when and how you should 
invest in your future.

If you would like to be on our panel, email Aimee Meade 
<mailto:Aimee.Meade@theguardian.com> for more details.

If you would like to leave a question, please do so in the comments section 
below, or come back to ask it live – and follow the debate – on Thursday 27 
February, 12-1.30pm GMT.

Remember that to participate you need to register for a Guardian ID and log in 
prior to the discussion. To create a Guardian ID, clickhere 
<https://register.theguardian.com/social-enterprise/>.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector <>, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/social-enterprise/>

Panel to come

Kate Sayer, partner in Sayer Vincent 
<http://www.sayervincent.co.uk/home#.Uwt6BBnV3e4>

Kate has in-depth knowledge of the legal and financial frameworks within which 
charities and social enterprises have to work, including taxation and VAT. She 
also works to improve the effectiveness of organisations through better ways of 
working, improved risk management processes and better support functions. Kate 
is the author of a number of publications and guides on charity finance, 
taxation and management.

Louise O'Sullivan, social bond manager at Investing for Good 
<http://www.investingforgood.co.uk/>

Louise brings seven years of Corporate and Investment Banking experience to 
her role as social bond manager at Investing for Good. Her past experience 
involved working for a large European bank on event driven acquisition finance 
transactions for large UK, Irish and Nordic clients where she honed her credit 
analysis, financial modelling and structuring skills. She made the move from 
banking into social finance in 2013 as she was inspired by the prospect of an 
alternative financial market where investment capital is put to good use in 
order to create social value. Since joining the sector, Louise has also 
developed her social impact measurement skills and is committed to helping 
clients to better evidence, track and report on their social impact.

Candice Motran, investment associate at Big Society Capital 
<http://www.bigsocietycapital.com/>

Before joining Big Society Capital, Candice spent two years working as an 
innovation and growth consultant at The Foundation, advising clients from the 
third sector, financial services and retail. Prior to this, Candice 
participated in the social enterprise leadership programme On Purpose, during 
which she designed and implemented a social impact measurement system for HCT 
Group.

Simon Maclaren, trustee at Scottish Charity Finance Group (SCFG)

Simon has been on SCFG's committee for five years. He is a freelance 
accountant and consultant who works with charities in the Edinburgh area and 
the UK. He has also worked with charities in Malawi, Kenya and Cambodia.

David Hopkins, senior advisory manager, Charities and Grant Making Charities 
Aid Foundation <https://www.cafonline.org/>

David heads up the Charities and Grant Making Solutions team at CAF. He has 
over 15 years experience in the not for profit sector and has experience of 
both managing multi-million grant making programmes and seven-figure 
fundraising. He has advised and consulted across a wide range of areas 
including fundraising; charity governance and registration; exit planning; 
organisational, project and policy development; grant management; and 
monitoring and evaluation. Outside of work David also spent 10 years as a 
non-executive director of a social enterprise with special responsibility for 
driving business growth and income generation.

Richard Hunt, client relations manager, Charities Aid Foundation 
<https://www.cafonline.org/>

Richard is a client relations manager with the Charities Aid Foundation, 
specialising in providing lending to charities. His approach to lending is 
built on over 15 years experience, having previously worked in both the retail 
banking and charitable sector, giving him the unique viewpoint of being on 
'both sides of the fence', coupled with being a trustee of a small charity.
