
In the spring of 1948 I was dispatched to Havana by Cosmopolitan (then a 
literary magazine) on the ridiculous mission of askingErnest Hemingway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ernesthemingway> to write an article on “The 
Future of Literature”. Of course no writer knows the future of literature 
beyond what he’ll write the next morning, if that, but there I was, finding out.

I checked into the Hotel Nacional for the express purpose of knocking on 
Hemingway’s door, but took the coward’s way out and wrote him a note, asking 
him to please send me a brief refusal, which would be very helpful to the 
Future of Hotchner. Instead of a note I received a phone call the next morning 
from Hemingway, who proposed five o’clock drinks at his favourite Havana bar, 
the Floridita.

He arrived precisely on time, an overpowering presence, not in height, for he 
was only an inch or so over 6ft, but in impact. Everyone in the place responded 
to his entrance. The two frozen daiquiris the barman placed in front of us were 
in conical glasses big enough to hold long-stemmed roses.

“Papa doble,” Ernest said, “the ultimate achievement of the daiquiri maker’s 
art.” He conversed with insight and rough humour about famous writers, the 
Brooklyn Dodgers, actors, prize-fighters, Hollywood phonies, fish, politicians, 
everything but the Future of Literature. He left abruptly after our fourth or 
fifth daiquiri – I lost count – but I was able to retain in the rum mist of my 
head that he was going to pick me up at six o’clock the next morning and take 
me on a tour around the Morro Castle waters in his boat, the Pilar.

Steering from topside controls, Hemingway took the Pilar several hours up the 
coast. On the way back we hooked what he referred to as a “stunted marlin” but 
to me looked like an unstunted whale. He strapped me into the catch chair and 
handed me the big heavy rod and reel. I had never caught anything bigger than 
a 10lb bass out of a rowboat and I probably would have had a tough struggle, 
but Ernest guided me every step of the way, from when to pull up to set the 
hook to when to bring him in to be taken. The thrill of having reeled in this 
monster was muted, however, when he unhooked the marlin and set him free.

When we returned from the boat to the Nacional and were saying goodbye, Ernest 
said, mentioning it for the first time: “The fact is, I do not know a damn 
thing about the Future of Anything.” He asked what they were paying and when I 
said $10,000, he said well, that was enough to perk up the Future of Something, 
perhaps a short story, and that we should stay in touch.


Hemingway in Love by AE Hotchner is published by Picador at £14.99. To order a 
copy for £10.49, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/337540/>
