
Since our family home and our woods are open to complete strangers, one of the 
questions we are most frequently asked is about safeguards; about what 
background checks we run and what references we take. For a long time I thought 
that the question arose from the widespread paranoia about paedophilia and 
rather dismissed it. I've long thought that our neurosis surrounding child 
abuse is immensely damaging to children. We teach them distrust as soon as 
possible; we keep them on a very tight, albeit invisible, leash and fret as 
soon as a stranger helps them back on to the swing in the park.

The fact that the nonagenarian widow of our former village vicar had to be CRB 
checked to help out at the Sunday school once a month struck me as ridiculous 
and absurd. And I'm astonished by our extraordinary hypocrisy on the subject: 
in recent years we've all become obsessed by child protection, and yet at the 
same time have allowed them to become sexualised at an ever younger age. If 
they're losing their innocence, I feel, it's our fault as well as the fault of 
those people we demonise.

But then someone we knew quite well (nothing to do with this project) was 
sentenced to a very long stretch for horrible crimes against children, and I 
belatedly acknowledged that safeguards are, if not foolproof, incredibly 
important. Neither my wife Francesca nor I are particularly house-proud – if a 
guest breaks a bowl or spills soup on the carpet we don't care too much; but we 
are now fairly militant in our defence of our children, and indeed of anyone 
who is living here.

The system we've evolved is this: before anyone comes long term, they have to 
come for a few days' trial so that we can check them out and vice versa. And 
before they're even invited for a few days' trial there's the filter of a long 
email or telephone conversation. Running an open-door policy doesn't mean 
there's not someone on watch at that door. During the trial period our attitude 
is, I'm afraid, a bit like it should be with a domestic dog: you just don't 
leave the children alone with them.

Thereafter we take two references. If someone has been referred to us by a 
charity we ask that charity to supply a full national police check. We are, 
with the help of local experts, working out a child-protection policy which 
will, almost certainly, mean that everyone coming here for more than a few days 
will have to be CRB vetted. Anyone with a history of crimes against children 
would, obviously, be excluded.

That's not to say that we exclude people with other past convictions. We've 
had them here before and would happily have them here again in the future. We 
usually enjoy their company. Those who have been inside tend to be blunt and 
practical and great storytellers. The problem comes when you have to separate 
fact from fantasy. I've said before that we've had rough diamonds and smooth 
talkers here; it's the smooth talkers that I'm much more wary of.

If we get the safeguarding right, we hope to be more relaxed once the process 
is complete. Because, from a strategic point of view, one of the greatest 
advantages of sharing our home with other people is that they take some of the 
epic load of childcare off our shoulders. Not much of it, but just a bit, just 
enough that we're not cracking and the kids don't take us for granted. Often 
a guest will hold the baby so that, for once, we don't have to chop the onions 
one-handed. Or they help the girls in their endless quest to sticky tape the 
world together.

And we want people here to be able to hug or tickle our children without us, 
or them, or the kids, worrying that they're overstepping a boundary. But we'll 
only not worry once we've asked every question and pursued, as the police 
always say, every avenue of enquiry. We're learning that idealism only survives 
if it's fenced off by some pretty hardcore realism.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
