
In the years following my mother’s work as a war photographer for Vogue, she 
suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder, and became an alcoholic and 
a depressive. Part of her recovery process was to reinvent herself as a gourmet 
cook. We were living in Farley Farm House in East Sussex, and food was a way 
for Lee to return to the real world, and be creative, fun and experimental.

I was born in 1947; she and I had a very conflicted relationship. For the 
first 20 years of my life she was a pretty heavy-duty alcoholic, which created 
a gap between us. But she loved to encourage my curiosity, and one of the main 
ways she did so was through food. She and her friend Bettina McNulty would hang 
out in London, discovering new dishes and hunting down Egyptian, Greek, Turkish 
and Syrian ingredients. In those days food and cooking wasn’t nearly as diverse 
as it is now.

One day Wells Coates, a friend of my mother’s, came over. He was a successful 
modernist architect who was a great fan of Chinese cooking. I asked him, “What 
do Chinese people eat?” and as a joke he replied “Bird’s nests – bird’s nest 
soup.” It was to wind me up, as I was only a child at the time. But Lee seized 
on the idea and took us down to the farmyard, where we gathered hay and took it 
to the kitchen to make a bird’s nest.

Lee’s cooking was like a military operation. Everyone was press-ganged into 
it; if you showed up, you’d be given a huge drink, sat down and given a pile of 
vegetables to peel, slice and dice and so on. There were endless jobs and 
everyone would be sitting around, telling outrageous jokes, in a room 
absolutely filled with cigarette smoke. I was treated as an honorary adult. 
There was never a requirement to shut up and behave. Some of the people who 
came were the key artists of the 20th century, but it was all very casual and 
friendly. Lee was incredibly good company, but her guests had to be 
interesting, with some slightly exotic twist to them. Then she’d be your friend 
for life.

The hay “bird’s nest” was put into a big dish of consommé, and in the middle 
were these beautiful little orange eggs that she had whittled out of carrot.

We were used to dramatic moments around the table – some sort of wonderfully 
weird thing would often be ushered in. But these little bits of theatre weren’t 
done in a “hey, look at me” way. It all felt natural. Pleasing her friends was 
important to her. In the summer, she’d make this wonderful pudding, with little 
plain biscuits soaked in rum, like a brick wall of overlapping biscuits encased 
in chocolate sauce. It was the most fabulous dessert.

And as for the bird’s nest soup… it just tasted like consommé with a bit of 
hay in it.

Vogue 100: A Century of Style is at the National Portrait Gallery until 22 May
