
• Things will be a little different next week on Newsnight. Two anchors will 
share duties each day; one in the studio, and one on the road following the 
referendum campaign. Tonight’s show will unusually feature all threeNewsnight 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/newsnight> anchors with Emily Maitlis in 
Orlando, Kirsty Wark in Glasgow and Evan Davis on the Isle of Lewis. Once 
Britain has decided, the BBC2 show is set to revert to its traditional solo 
setup; or at any rate to doing so if next week doesn’t give it a taste for 
breaking away from a 1980s Paxman model that looks increasingly outdated. 
Pairing the mighty sole anchorman with female co-presenters is, after all, what 
Channel 4 News and Sky News did with Jon Snow and Adam Boulton five years ago, 
leaving Newsnight’s approach an anomaly. Such a switch would be in line with 
the way the BBC elsewhere frowns on shows without women – all next week’s 
pairings are either male-female or female-female.

• For old Indy hands, last week’s claim 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/i-trumpets-its-position-in-brexit-debate-as-only-british-national-newspaper-free-from-political-and-owner-interference/>
 by i editor Oly Duff that his paper was “the only national newspaper free of 
political affiliation or proprietorial interference” resembled a Proustian 
madeleine; it carried them back to the Independent’srelaunch 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2010/apr/20/theindependent-simon-kelner>
 just before the 2010 general election, with an uncannily similar boast – “free 
from party political ties, free from proprietorial influence” on the masthead. 
Back then, the proud slogan proved embarrassingly short-lived: with few 
convinced of non-interference (Alexander Lebedev had already by then signalled 
a desire to change editor, and Simon Kelner steped down four months later), the 
bit about meddling proprietors was discreetly dropped from front pages. Let’s 
see how the madeleine crumbles this time.

• 22 May: noting that new ITV programming supremo Kevin Lygo appears to have 
gnomically called a halt to Trevor McDonald and Piers Morgan’s US true-crime 
shows, Monkey suggestsJonathan Ross 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross> should be next in line for 
axeing. 7 June: “Jonathan Ross chatshow to end after its next series as ITV 
sources say a return is ‘highly unlikely’” (Daily Mirror). Only sayin’, though 
it should be added that ITV subsequently insisted Ross will be back, following 
a curiously protracted hiatus after his autumn 2016 outing, towards the end of 
2017.

• Jumpy times for the Radio Times, which appears at last to be taking talk of 
its “cover curse” seriously. No footballers or managers were risked on its four 
Euro 2016 fronts, as Monkey pointed out last week; and the latest cover pulls 
off the remarkable feat of celebrating the Queen’s birthday without a picture 
of the Queen (instead there’s a competition-winning child’s image of a crown), 
which could suggest a mag running scared. If it is, it might have in mind the 
last cover with famous faces on it: Chris Evans and Matt LeBlanc (“would you 
buy a used car show off these men?”), which didn’t work out too well.

• In Meet the Readers, Daily Telegraph racing columnist Charlie Brooks is 
charged with listening to Torygraph types to find out their views on Brexit – a 
series apparently designed to deflect charges that the paper had become a 
Brexit propaganda organ, with the risk of spoiling its relationship with the 
government (and worse, it has been suggested, make life awkward for chairman 
Aidan Barclay). So far he’s interviewed a maths graduate who is for Brexit, a 
photographer who is for Brexit, a former HMRC worker who is for Brexit, and has 
come out for Brexit himself. Overall, it’s been a splendidly rigorous and 
open-minded exercise.

• A strange tale from seasoned US indie producer Caryn Mandabach, ruminating 
on the sometimes “shambolic” aspects of commissioning UK-style as she basks in 
the success of Peaky Blinders. “After we sold Peaky,” Mandabach told the Sunday 
Times, the buyer at theBBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> “didn’t speak 
to me for a year. Her assistant had asked me if I wanted tea. I said ‘a very 
weak one’. The tea came and I said, ‘Oh my God, that’s really weak tea’ – like 
a compliment, right?. But the buyer thought I was being mean to her assistant, 
so ... she stopped speaking to me”. Any guesses as to who it was?

Flare-ups as part of the rivalry between Tony Blair and Gordon Brown used to 
be dubbed “the TBGBs” by insiders, and it may be time to adapt the tag for the 
distressing sibling feud between the Mail titles and their respective editors, 
Paul Dacre and Geordie Greig. The latest example of the PDGGs? That would be the
two-page takedown 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3632366/Mellor-s-lust-money-s-sued-30m-land-deal-Ex-Tory-Minister-court-battle-Italian-count-accused-cheating-investors.html>
 in Thursday’s Mail of former cabinet minister David Mellor – gigantic 
headline: “Mellor’s lust for money and why he’s being sued over a £30m land 
deal” – who just happens to be the classical music critic of the Mail on 
Sunday, and could be found there four days earlierpurring 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/event/article-3622307/Happiness-35-CD-Haydn-box-set-composer-s-symphonies-hardly-hit-concert-hall-CDs-gap.html>
 about an agreeable 35-CD Haydn box set.

• Why attack a writer for a newspaper in the same group, something papers 
normally carefully avoid? One reason could be that the previous weekend’s MoS 
had been particularly provocative, including as it did an anti-Vote Leave 
splash (“Far right in plot to hijack Brexit”), a two-page expose inside on a 
“Neo-Nazi Brexiteer”, an amiableinterview 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3625530/I-m-going-make-Boris-pay-warns-Cameron-PM-says-Bojo-s-Brexit-argument-nonsense-stilts-WON-T-sack-wins-vote.html>
 with David Cameron, bete noire of the passionately pro-Brexit Daily Mail, 
giving him a chance to say “I’m going to make Boris pay”, an op-ed attack by 
Betty Boothroyd on the horrible prospect of “Boris as our Brexit PM, propped up 
by Farage”, and apro-remain leader 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3625729/The-Mail-Sunday-comment-Awkward-truth-Outers-no-longer-ignore.html>
 arguing that the “Outers” must face up to facts on immigration and the 
economy. After all that, the hard-to-like music critic may have seemed like an 
invitingly soft target for retaliation.
