
Laura Sharples has been passionate about science since she was a child, with 
her favourite childhood toy being a pretend microscope, which she used to 
examine insects in the garden. Now the 25-year-old is helping scientists in the 
lab inspect bugs of a very different kind in order to monitor the health of 
young patients atAlder Hey children’s hospital <http://www.alderhey.nhs.uk/> in 
Liverpool.

Sharples has worked as a medical laboratory assistant for a year and is part 
of a team helping to prepare and process pathology samples in areas such as 
microbiology, haematology, biochemistry, newborn screening and histology. From 
growing bacteria cultures in order to test for dangerous infections such as 
MRSA to spinning blood to check for results which indicate if a child has 
cancer, her work plays a vital role in patient care and treatment at the 
hospital.


“One of my favourite parts of the job is going onto the wards and doing 
routine testing for bugs such as MRSA,” she says. “I don’t think people realise 
how important that is, but if you have poorly kids, the slightest bugs in the 
air that they are breathing in from the vents can really mean life and death to 
some of the patients.”


Tom Knight is a ward chef at Alder Hey, providing an on-demand food service to 
young patients. He had previously worked for a prestigious hotel chain in 
London, but was motivated to take up the job in his home city after his nephew 
fell ill and needed hospital treatment. Like Sharples, he relishes the 
opportunity to be on the wards and meet the children and their parents. He 
works closely with clinical staff, such as nurses and dietitians, to ensure the 
children are receiving the best food to aid their recovery.


Related: Our Health Heroes: Campaign celebrates vital role of unsung 
healthcare staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/skills-for-health-partner-zone/2016/feb/09/our-health-heroes-campaign-unsung-healthcare-staff>

Knight says: “Often in the past, the food trolley went up to the wards and the 
meal was just served without any interaction with the patients. Now we can see 
if the child is eating properly and, if not, we can talk to the child directly 
to find out what might be wrong and give them the option of eating something 
different. Food is like a second medicine – if we can give them a good meal, 
they will get out of hospital a lot quicker. It really does work.”


Sharples and Knight are among thousands of healthcare support workers around 
the UK whose roles are vital to the running of NHS services. Yet despite making 
up almost 40% of the workforce, they are often overlooked in favour of clinical 
staff such as nurses and doctors.


A Skills for Health <http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/> and National Skills 
Academy for Health <http://www.nsahealth.org.uk/> campaign, Our Health Heroes 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/ourhealthheroes>, launched in February to 
redress the balance and celebrate these unsung workers. The online campaign is 
raising awareness of the significant role the support workforce plays in 
patient care. As part of the campaign, the public have been invited to share 
their personal experiences and thank these staff for their contribution to 
health services via Twitter and Facebook using the hashtag#OurHealthHeroes 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OurHealthHeroes?src=hash>.


It was due to the campaign’s success and the variety of stories that were 
shared as part of the movement that Skills for Health recognised the message it 
was promoting had gravitas and, after being approached by a leading children’s 
hospital, decided to use the campaign to take a closer look at the unique role 
of support workers in paediatric care. So from 31 May to 3 June, Our Health 
Heroes will focus on the stories of these important healthcare staff.


Candace Miller, director of the National Skills Academy for Health, says 60% 
of all interactions with people in need of care and their families are with 
support workers. Their roles are especially important in children’s healthcare.


She says: “The care, compassion and expertise which they provide patients is 
the bedrock of great services but that is especially the case within paediatric 
healthcare, where the whole family experiences a particularly challenging and 
emotional time when a baby or child is unwell.


“That is why the National Skills Academy for Health is absolutely committed to 
ensuring that healthcare support workers are valued for the contributions they 
make and supported to develop the skills they need, and it is why we want to 
draw attention to#OurHealthHeroes 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ourhealthheroes&f=images&src=tyah>, wherever 
they work.”


Melissa Swindell, interim director of HR at Alder Hey, supports that view. She 
believes the hospital’s support workforce are the “lifeblood” of the 
organisation and the “glue that holds it all together”, enabling the clinicians 
to get on with the detailed and complicated work that they need to do treating 
patients and families.


I feel like everyone on the ward is my family and I am their mum
Linda Mosley 
Parents are just as important as the children and she says the hospital’s 
support staff understand that. She recalls the story of a porter, whose job it 
is to take the children to the operating theatre. He turned the journey through 
the hospital into a fun game; not only did this make the frightened child feel 
a little more relaxed, the parents were also at ease afterwards.


Swindell says: “Our support staff understand their role in helping clinicians 
do their job. If you take that example, the little boy turned up to the 
anaesthetic room calmer, but the mum and dad were also happier.”


Being able to make children and their families as comfortable as possible 
during their time in hospital is exactly the reason Linda Mosley became a 
housekeeper for the neuroscience ward atBristol Royal hospital for children 
<http://www.uhbristol.nhs.uk/patients-and-visitors/your-hospitals/bristol-royal-hospital-for-children/>
. From helping children choose their meals from the menu to ordering clinical 
and non-clinical stock for the ward, she claims no two days are ever the same 
and she is proud to do a job which makes a difference to the lives of so many 
patients and their families.


“I really care about the work I do and am proud to do it,” she says. “It’s 
such a rewarding job even though it is stressful sometimes. We are in the 
middle of everything and are the agony aunts of everyone from parents to nurses 
and doctors. I feel like everyone on the ward is my family and I am their mum.”


Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed by Skills for 
Health <http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/>
