
We are taught a story needs a good beginning, solid middle and rousing end to 
be coherent and delight the reader. In brand storytelling this is less true. A 
brand may set off with their version of beginning, but the customer is more 
likely to determine the detail of the middle and end – if indeed it has a 
conclusion.


Customer relationship management (CRM) should be viewed as a work in progress, 
a story ever unfolding. What matters to someone today isn’t what matters 
tomorrow, as the story of their own life ebbs and flows. It is precisely in the 
smaller details of individual lives that brands can enrich their message and 
nurture longer-lasting appeal.

Inform your story. Augment your first-party records with quality data from 
other sources to better understand consumer behaviour and motivation. Identify 
segments that matter and approach with relevant messaging pertaining to your 
universal truth. Then be prepared to evolve as that detail itself evolves. That 
means understanding not just how a mum may feel during a specific week of 
pregnancy, or how someone’s weekday coffee drinking habits change on a weekend, 
but how their individual brand interactions over time create opportunities to 
be more relevant, timely and useful.

Brands brave enough to embrace smaller details of human lives know it’s not 
enough to know this detail – they must find rich sources of creativity there. 
In the bringing together of individual customer understanding and creative 
storytelling lies the opportunity to move beyond inertial, functional or 
transactional loyalty, to a space where deeper emotional loyalty resides. A 
space where brands feel constantly fresh and relevant. And where the stories 
they tell move beyond the personalised to something more personal.

After all, aren’t the best stories those that speak to us all as individuals, 
at different stages of our lives? For you and your customers, that’s knowing 
what is now and anticipating what is next. Dare you turn the page on your story?

Beth Pope is joint managing director at The Real Adventure Unlimited 
<https://www.realadventure.co.uk/>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
