
Was it logax + logay ≡ loga(xy) or logax – logay ≡ loga(x/y)?

Remembering by heart the laws of logarithms may soon be a thing of the past 
for A-level and AS-level maths students.
The government's exams agency, the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority 
(QCA), is asking maths teachers whether pupils should still have to memorise a 
list of formulae for their exams. They also want to know whether teachers think 
it is time calculators were allowed in all maths A-level, AS-level and further 
maths papers. Some exam boards ban calculators in one paper.

Teachers have from now until July 9 to make their views known.

Alice Rogers, vice-president of the London Mathematical Society and professor 
of maths at King's College London, said banning calculators imposed a 
"straitjacket" on A-level maths exams.

"Calculators allow students to do quick calculations. It is possible to set 
questions for which a calculator is no help," she said.

"Trigonometric calculations are hard to do without a calculator," said Nick 
Bowes from the Advisory Committee on Maths Education (Acme). "At A-level, 
students aren't dealing with simple numbers. The ability to manipulate formulae 
and problem-solve is as important as numeracy."

But Rogers and Bowes are less sure about whether students should have to 
memorise formulae.

"There are some formulae that are so straightforward, everyone should know 
them and others that students should be able to look up," Rogers said.

And what do employers think? Richard Wainer, head of education and skills at 
the Confederation of British Industry, said students' numerical skills need to 
be "sorted out" before A-level. Employers want more workers with the analytical 
and problem-solving skills that often go with the study of maths, he added.

The QCA has cottoned on to this. It is also asking teachers for their opinions 
on whether there should be a greater emphasis on problem-solving and modelling 
in maths A-level and AS-level.

Universities claim that maths A-level papers do not distinguish the best 
mathematicians from the good ones. They also don't think the A* grade, which is 
due to be introduced in 2010, will help much.

Acme said in a statement: "In mathematics, [the A*] is likely to reward a high 
degree of accuracy on straightforward questions rather than reveal a high 
degree of aptitude for the subject ... There is a growing dissatisfaction in 
universities with the effectiveness of GCE mathematics as a discriminator for 
admissions for the more competitive courses. This has been accompanied by a 
growth of interest in universities setting admissions tests, singly or in 
combination."

If this is the case, should no-calculator exams and the memorising of formulae 
really have had their day?
