
Electric cars are a growth market in the UK: 2,500 sold in 2013; 6,700 in 
2014; 9,900 in 2015. The expansion in sales is driven largely by the 
practicalities of runabouts such as the Renault ZOE. Owners may be a touch 
greener in their outlook than much of the population – but it’s not compulsory.

There remains cultural inertia to overcome, however. Car owners are accustomed 
to the 300-400 mile interval between visits to the filling station, just as 
they’re accustomed to wincing at the price of fuel but grimly depressing the 
trigger regardless. To do anything else requires a leap into the unknown – and 
that’s just a little bit scary. Variations on the theme of “yes, but” greet 
anyone suggesting electric may be the way to go. Those arguments have some 
validity: if you’re a sales executive chugging up and down the motorways doing 
50,000 miles a year then an electric car is not for you, but for anyone 
orbiting the UK-average of around 8,000 miles a year with the commute, the 
school run, trips to the shops and the occasional long-haul journey, the “yes, 
but” arguments are looking increasingly outdated. Here’s where they’re going 
wrong.

Related: Renault ZOE: the all-electric vehicle at a supermini price tag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/2016/may/19/renault-zoe-the-all-electric-vehicle-at-a-supermini-price-tag>

Difficult to recharge!
You know which car is difficult to recharge? The one using petrol. The light 
comes on when you’re 50 miles from the nearest service station, or you’re lost, 
or you’ve located the last filling station that still shuts at 10pm. Electric 
cars, conversely, just need a mains socket – and there are plenty of those. 
Granted, a bog-standard household three-pin isn’t the fastest way to charge, 
but it’ll get the job done if you have the time. Easily installed wall boxes at 
home or work are the preferred method.

Tricky to maintain!
Perhaps – but only if you enjoy the DIY approach. If you have your maintenance 
done by a qualified professional the only difference is that you take your 
electric car to a slightly cleaner part of the garage. The nice thing about 
electric cars is there’s no oil changes, no tuning, no oxygen sensors to break 
and no injectors to clog.

Expensive!
Probably not as expensive as you think: there’s a plug-in car grant that drops 
the purchase price of electric cars. Factor in the vehicle tax waiver and 
suddenly it’s a very good deal. For anyone residing in London, electric cars 
are also exempt from the congestion charge – you do have to pay the one in 
Durham, but it’s only £2 and you can use a free charging point.

Range!
Well, how much range do you need? Renault’s ZOE covers more than 140 miles on 
the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) test, while Renault itself suggests a 
rather more realistic estimated range* of 106 miles in summer and 71 in winter 
(lithium-ion batteries hate the cold). That’s going to cover most commutes. 
Long journeys require a bit more thought and planning to make use of the 
thousands of public charging stations scattered around car parks, town centres 
and service stations. Most electric cars have a satnav showing charging points 
– and for those that don’t there are plenty of apps. The loo break becomes a 
snack break. Like travelling with toddlers, you get used to stretching your 
legs every so often.

Slow!
They’re slow if you want to deliver milk really quietly at 5am (which, after 
all, is why milk floats are electric), but powerful enough for 300mph on the 
Bonneville salt flats (more precisely, 321.834mph – the current electric land 
speed record). The everyday urban experience is thankfully somewhere in 
between: most electric cars have enough power to commit the full range of 
speeding offences. Renault’s ZOE is electronically limited to 84mph – just fast 
enough to get you in serious bother. They also have prodigious amounts of 
torque: 220Nm for ZOE available from 0RPM for when you need to get away from 
those lights in a hurry.

*All ranges are based on standard driving styles and weather conditions
