
Volunteering abroad on short-term aid projects has become a rite of passage 
for many young people, but does it do any good?We asked students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/09/students-speak-can-volunteer-holidays-be-a-force-for-good>
 to share their views on theoften criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/13/beware-voluntourists-doing-good> 
“voluntourism” trend, and the reaction was overwhelmingly favourable. Here are 
some of the responses.

Through the right channels, volunteering can work for all involved

There are swathes of voluntourism 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/feb/17/volunteer-holidays-how-to-find-right-project>
 traps out to deceive people and I was lucky that, after passing on various 
volunteering “packages”, I remembered a chance recommendation about a 
government programme, ICS.

Based on my assessment, they assigned me to a disabilities centre in Ghana for 
three months. There, I was thrown into challenges I’d never faced before: 
presenting to schoolchildren and teachers; producing our own foreign language 
documentary; teaching ICT, through language and communication barriers, to the 
deaf.

My three British colleagues and their local counterparts were even more 
remarkable. They built a school from scratch – not a brick shell, but a 
curriculum, lesson plans, examinations, certification.

These operations are sustainable, too we trained our local counterpart 
volunteers and handed over to the next cohort of British volunteers.

Were there problems? Of course. The programme operates on subsidies; 
volunteers get out as much as they put in, and some don’t put in; and not all 
projects allow so much freedom. But with a healthy dose of cynicism, I feel we 
had an impact. It’s important to realise it is not selfish to think about what 
these programmes have done for us, the “volunteers”.

Through my work, I picked up the satisfaction of teaching, which I still carry 
on at home. Through my involvement with the community I realised there’s such a 
vast, unexplored world outside my doorstep. Through my brilliant colleagues and 
our adventures, I came out of my shell and am ready to take on that world.

James Wong, Barts and the London medical and dentistry school, UK

Don’t tar all projects with the same brush

Related: 15 ways to make your mark as a volunteer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/jul/25/global-development-volunteering-guide-volunteers-internships-students>

Volunteering <https://www.theguardian.com/society/volunteering> can be an 
exceptionally effective form of foreign aid. Having skilled and passionate 
people working alongside foreign counterparts not only delivers immediate, 
tangible results in the project delivery, but also builds the most powerful 
tool for development: human capacity. Over a decade of involvement with 
volunteer programmes in south-east Asia and the Pacific, I’ve seen numerous 
examples of positive change stemming from such projects.

My particular focus has been with Australian Business Volunteers 
<http://www.abv.org.au/> (ABV), an organisation that places skilled 
professionals on short-term assignments (from one to four months). We work with 
local counterparts to deliver a targeted, measurable project that directly 
addresses an identified need. While the projects are beneficial in themselves, 
it is the capacity building of the local counterparts that delivers the 
greatest long term benefit. By “teaching them to fish” we empower them to be a 
force for positive change long after we go home.

In the countries where we operate there are precious few other avenues for 
this level of professional development. ABV, like some other Australian 
volunteer organisations, operates in a professional environment with 
professional people and delivers overwhelmingly positive outcomes. If there are 
specific projects or organisations operating that are delivering negative 
outcomes, they need to be addressed. But they don’t in any way detract from the 
value of other projects or the volunteer programme as a whole.

Noven Purnell-Webb, Deakin University, Australia

Related: Are there too many sustainable development goals? | Carla Kweifio-Okai
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/20/are-there-too-many-sustainable-development-goals>

Volunteers have much to offer


Volunteering overseas provides an opportunity for passionate individuals to 
utilise their skill sets in order to contribute to sustainable development 
around the world.

Yes, there are instances when volunteer positions are abused by fun-seeking 
individuals who are more intrigued with the idea of experiencing exotic 
locations and foreign cultures. However, these foolish examples should not 
detract from the advantages of providing firsthand assistance to vulnerable 
populations in whatever capacity possible.

Volunteers have the potential to offer much-needed services with an array of 
expertise that may be lacking in the developing world. Therefore, more rigorous 
screening and acceptance of volunteer applicants could potentially lead to more 
qualified individuals, as the volunteers dutifully provide essential services, 
instead of using the position as an excuse to vacation or possibly take work 
away from unemployed locals. Furthermore, capacity building between the 
volunteers and targeted community may lead to increased cooperation involving 
governmental and NGO entities.

Patrick Rulong, University of Waterloo, Canada

Volunteering is a form of grassroots development

Volunteering can be a force for good but it depends on the approach. It’s 
important that volunteers adapt and are more of a “helping hand” rather than 
trying to reshape cultural values and norms.

The community I volunteered in, Nuevo Gualcho in El Salvador, now has a 
tourist route that is run by the community which British and national 
volunteers worked together to create. Volunteering should acknowledge the 
skills that communities have and give them the knowledge and the opportunity to 
utilise those skills. The cultural exchange gives volunteers the opportunity to 
learn and work with people they otherwise would not have met. However, 
volunteering abroad has become commercialised and has reached a staged where 
many people do it to tick off their bucket list or add to their CV.

The humanitarian spirit can be easily lost in the mix of self-centered 
characters. However, the greatest impact that volunteers make is the 
relationships they build with locals. The impressions they leave are 
unforgettable and, speaking from personal experience, we truly do make friends 
for life. When a volunteer’s heart is in their work, the impact they can make 
is priceless. There are different ways to bring about change and volunteering 
is not always the solution. Volunteers need to be careful and research what 
their role will be while volunteering, as many companies are out for their 
money and sustainable development can be used as a tool to attract them.

Victoria Poku-Amanfo, University of Exeter, UK

Volunteers beware

I’ve travelled a lot and have never volunteered. I don’t think I’ll ever 
volunteer. For me it has never seemed worthwhile, when weighing up my options. 
I don’t think you need to volunteer to have a good time or feel like you’re 
doing your bit to stop human misery.


Does volunteering really help the people you’re supposed to be helping? I 
don’t know. But what I do know is that volunteering is big business, and those 
who choose to volunteer shouldn’t be condemned for the sins of the industry.

I’ve met volunteers who were not allowed to leave the area they were helping 
out in. I’ve met a volunteer who caught the programme coordinator pilfering 
funds from an orphanage in Kenya. I’ve met plenty of volunteers who seem worn 
out, dissatisfied and ready to go home.

Volunteering is shamefully expensive and can be exploitative. $2,000 for two 
weeks in India doesn’t add up. $2,000 in India is big, big money. Then again 
it’s probably better than $2000 for two weeks in Europe on Contiki [tour 
holidays].

Declan Quali, University of Wollongong, Australia

‘What harm have we caused?’

I have read many articles and heard many people claim that travelling abroad 
to volunteer in industries such as health care, education or building services 
does not bring about any benefits to those we are trying to help. I wish people 
who believe this would justify themselves. I cannot think of any harm being 
brought to a community by individuals from the western world building wells for 
a community so that they are provided with clean drinking water to prevent the 
spread of cholera, or helping to improve a child’s English, which will benefit 
their future education and job prospects.

It isn’t until you volunteer to do this work yourself that you realise what a 
massive impact you are making on people’s lives. I discovered this last summer 
when I travelled to the poorest region of India for five weeks to build 10 new 
homes for orphaned families. The families, the builders and the community in 
general could not have been more welcoming, friendly and grateful for the work 
we were doing for them. As a result, each family had a new, cement-built home 
with running water and electricity instead of a wooden hut held together with 
sticks and rope. Now I ask you, what harm have we caused?

Alison Lannon, University of Glasgow, Scotland 

Does volunteering abroad have its merits? Or is a rethink required? Share your 
views in the comment thread below.
