
Parliament frequently throws up its own horrors of misdirection, truths 
half-told and selective memory. But it’s frequently in the downtime between the 
big set pieces that the dystopian nature of Westminster’s parallel universe is 
mercilessly unveiled, when the gap between fantasy and reality is revealed as a 
chasm.


 The leader of the House, Chris Grayling <http://chrisgrayling.net/>, clearly 
regards himself as a “hail fellow well met” sort; an amusing raconteur with 
whom anyone would count themselves lucky to get stuck in a lift for an hour or 
two; his delusion is such that he would almost certainly regard any fatalities 
in that time as attributable to oxygen debt rather than self-inflicted through 
boredom. There is no gag he can’t kill stone dead and his comic timing is out 
by days rather than seconds.

 “In answer to Graham’s question about whether I like salt and vinegar on my 
chips,” he said chirpily. “Actually I like mushy peas and gravy.” A flicker of 
confusion crossed his face when no one else in the Commons responded to his top 
banter. His failure to appreciate that a lame gag about the previous day’s 
prime minister’s questions wouldn’t have even been funny 24 hours earlier 
bordered on tragedy.

 Someone in the Tory party should probably have a word with Grayling to let 
him know that the most important requirement of any joke is that it should be 
funny. But Labour’sChris Bryant <http://www.chris-bryant.co.uk/> certainly 
won’t be complaining if no one does. After Angela Eagle’s well-deserved 
elevation to shadow business secretary, Bryant has inherited her old job as 
shadow leader, which means he gets a full half-hour every week to tease 
Grayling.

 Eagle was so good at it that half the time Grayling had no idea she was 
making fun of him. Bryant has a way to go before his stiletto becomes that 
sharp but there’s every sign he might become a quick learner. He began well by 
making a joke at his own expense – a form of verbal exchange so far beyond 
Grayling’s comprehension it was guaranteed to raise his anxiety levels.

“It has been rumoured that I turned down the job of shadow defence secretary 
because I wanted this country to invade Russia,” Bryant said. “I can assure the 
House that I have absolutely no intention, either in that job or this job, of 
invading Russia. In fact, the way things are going I do not suppose we would be 
able to invade Alderney.” Then Bryant became more focused and added: “Besides, 
I could not honestly think of a better job than this one.”

This had more than the ring of truth, as there is no easier shadow government 
job than going head to head with Grayling every Thursday morning. Shooting fish 
in a barrel. Bryant then offered to go on a bonding holiday with the leader of 
the House at a B&B that welcomed same-sex couples (Grayling tried and failed to 
look entirely comfortable at this suggestion), demanded more debating time for 
the government’s legislation, and then invited his opponent to smile a little. 
A smile has seldom looked so wan.

 Grayling’s torture only ended with the intervention of the SNP’s Pete 
Wishart, who wanted to know why parliament was taking a week recess for the Lib 
Dem conference the following week when that party only had eight MPs.

As none of the glorious eight were in the chamber, Grayling could only shrug. 
Let’s be generous, though. Perhaps they had all left early forBournemouth 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/autumn_conference> to take advantage of the 
super-saver train fare. Every little helps when your party is that small. 
Besides, it’s always best to book early to ensure you don’t miss the 
disappointment.
