
With the EU referendum later this week, the opening of the annual Unison 
conference on 21 June could not be happening at a more important, or uncertain, 
time.

Whatever the result on Thursday, the 2,000 delegates have plenty to debate. 
The underlying themes that are on the agenda will not surprise public service 
managers in the slightest. Austerity, cuts and the struggle to understand, let 
alone coordinate, increasingly fragmented services, feature strongly.

The consequences of spending cuts and the public sector pay cap can be seen in 
the growing demands for a statutory living wage.

Growing staff shortages, as employees move elsewhere or are made redundant and 
their posts go unfilled, are being increasingly felt by public sector workers 
who have no option but to cover the work of more than one post.

More motions have been put forward on stress for the conference’s final agenda 
than ever before, as a result of the growing pressure on public services. 
Workers say they are reaching breaking point, feel increasingly demoralised and 
ground down by endless rationing, cuts, performance indicators and inspection.

Related: The Guardian view on the trade union bill: unprincipled and 
unnecessary | Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/the-guardian-view-on-the-trade-union-bill-unprincipled-and-unnecessary>

The draconian Trade Union Act will make it harder for staff to voice their 
frustrations over pay, but that won’t stop Unison from redoubling its efforts 
to protect public sector workers’ jobs and living standards.

Managers struggling to cope with staff shortages won’t be surprised that 
housing is another issue of growing importance. The high cost of housing means 
NHS and town hall staff are having to live further away from their workplaces. 
It won’t be long before public service employers will need to acquire their own 
staff accommodation to rent before they can recruit new employees.

The under-funding of social care always provokes passionate and informed 
debate among care staff and family carers alike. Across the country, Unison 
members are asking their local councils to sign up to the ethical care charter 
that ensures decent commissioning standards, and with increasing success. An 
early adopter was Southwark council, which has seen staff turnover fall and 
client satisfaction levels soar.

There’s a new willingness for home care workers on zero-hours contracts to 
speak up about minimum wage abuses involving their unpaid travel time. There’s 
also growing concern about the effects of appalling 15-minute home visits, 
where staff feel they cannot provide all the necessary care, let alone have a 
conversation with the person they’re meant to be looking after.

Our workplace representatives are our greatest resource, and are now the eyes 
and ears of government regulators struggling with thousands of new service 
providers. This was recently highlighted by an Observer investigation into the
procurement antics of the Bright Tribe academy chain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/12/academy-schools-cash-cow-business>
, where failings had not been spotted by the Education Funding Agency or the 
National Audit Office.

This fantastic parliament of lay representatives and volunteers are the unsung 
heroes of our public services, and it is time to give them more recognition.

Dave Prentis is Unison’s general secretary

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
