
West Sweden is a great destination for a refreshing summer or autumn break – 
particularly if you adore the outdoors. The region’s coastline stretches from 
Gothenburg to the Norwegian border and is famed for its granite rocks, 
picturesque fishing villages and aquatic activities.

Ideal for adventurous types, there’s a wealth of activities including 
canoeing, hiking and cross-country running. Set sail on a local seafood safari, 
cycle through a stunning nature reserve or try sea kayaking where seals will 
keep you company.


For a true Swedish adventure, you have to embrace allemansrätt (right of 
public access), that enshrines your right to roam, and the best way to explore 
the islands of West Sweden is by canoe. So here’s your chance to win canoe tour 
for two.


One lucky winner, and guest, will take a five-day (four-night) self-guided 
canoe tour in Dalsland. Dalsland is famous for its canoeing opportunities, with 
breathtaking lakes (interconnected by locks and canals), untouched forest and 
pretty villages.


Included in the prize, supplied by Nature Travels, are return flights to 
Gothenburg, the use of a two-person Canadian canoe and a canoe trolley. For 
camping and dining you’ll be given a hurricane stove, a tent (suitable for up 
to three people) and a sleeping bag package.


To help navigate this unique adventure, the winner will also receive two maps, 
10 lock tickets and a “Nature Card” for overnight camping.


The winner will need to cover additional travel costs within Sweden (between 
the airport and the start/end point of the tour) and, although firewood is 
provided at each camping location, a camping saw/small axe will be required for 
preparing the wood.


As this prize involves plenty of exercise and adventure, both participants 
must be over 18 at the time of travel with a good general level of fitness and 
strength. They should be outdoor fans and good swimmers. The winner will also 
need adequate travel insurance against medical and personal accident risks.


If you’re game for the adventure of a lifetime, simply enter your details 
below – good luck and happy canoeing.

Terms and conditions

 * The Nature Travels prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents of 
the UK aged 18 and over. 
 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM”), their group companies or family members or anyone else 
connected to the Prize Draw. 
 * Entry into the Prize Draw is acceptance of these Terms and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Prize Draw you must enter your details as above. If you have 
any questions about how to enter or in connection with the Prize Draw, please 
emailcompetitions.glabs@theguardian.com 
<mailto:competitions.glabs@theguardian.com> with “Nature Travels prize draw” in 
the subject line.

 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. 
 * No responsibility is taken for entries that are lost, delayed, misdirected 
or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical or other 
reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt. 
 * The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 29 June 2016. Entries received after that 
date and time will not be considered. 
 * The winner will be chosen from a random draw of entries. 
 * One winner will receive a five-day (four-night) self-guided canoe tour of 
Dalsland, including: a pair of return economy flights from a London airport to 
Gothenburg (transfers in the UK and in Sweden are not included); Canoe 
equipment - 2-person Canadian canoe, paddles (wooden), buoyancy aids, 2 x pack 
barrels, canoe trolley; Kitchen equipment - Trangia-style hurricane stove with 
one litre methylated spirit (additional fuel can be purchased along the route 
if required); Camping equipment - tent (suitable for up to 3 persons, normally 
dome tents), sleeping bag package (2-season sleeping bag, liner and foam mat); 
Other - set of two maps; book of 10 lock tickets for lock transports 
(additional tickets can be purchased at individual locks if required, cost 30 
SEK/canoe, approx. £3); “Nature Card”, required for overnight camping at the 
designated camping spots (firewood is provided at these locations, but you 
should bring a camping saw/small axe for preparing the wood). Both participants 
must be over 18 at time of travel, in good health with a good general level of 
fitness and strength, enjoy the outdoors and be able to swim. Both participants 
must hold suitable travel insurance against medical and personal accident 
risks. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize 
and not specifically included in the prize.

 * The winner will be notified by phone or email on or before 1 July 2016 and 
given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM 
within 28 days of being notified by GNM, then the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner (and that winner 
will have to respond to the phone call or email from GNM within 28 days or else 
they will also forfeit their prize). Dates by arrangement between 1 May and 30 
September 2016 or 1 May and 30 September 2017. Tour must be taken by latest end 
date 30 September 2017. Start and end times are flexible by arrangement between 
09.00 and 18.00. The prize winners are welcome to have additional person(s) 
join them for the tour. Additional participants will be charged at standard 
prices at time of booking as outlined at
http://www.naturetravels.co.uk/water-canoe-tours-sweden-canoeing-dalsland-lake-district-sl7cs1.htm
 
<http://www.naturetravels.co.uk/water-canoe-tours-sweden-canoeing-dalsland-lake-district-sl7cs1.htm>

 * Details of the winner can be obtained by sending a stamped addressed 
envelope to the following address: Guardian Creative, Guardian News & Media 
Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 
 * The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable, and is not redeemable for 
cash or other prizes. 
 * GNM retains the right to substitute the prize with another prize of similar 
value in the event the original prize offered is not available. 
 * The winner may be required for promotional activity. 
 * No purchase necessary. 
 * Nothing in these terms and conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
for death, personal injury, fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation as a result 
of its negligence. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize Draw.
 * GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its control (including, without limitation, in 
the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The decision of GNM in all 
matters under its control is final and binding and no correspondence will be 
entered into. 
 * GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
where the failure is caused by something outside its reasonable control. Such 
circumstances shall include, but not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, 
flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political 
unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable accidents, supervening legislation 
or any other circumstances amounting to force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw will be governed by English law. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU. 