
There was a dog in the Daily Mail once who could tell when its owner had 
cancer, and then (this is the bit that won it the medal) could tell when the 
cancer came back. It's a mug's game holding your pets up to the standards set 
by Associated Newspapers (you will end up trying to keep your kitten in a 
teapot), but you would think even a bog-standard dog would be able to tell when 
you had a great big eight-and-a-half-month-sized living organism in your torso, 
sometimes visibly moving. Not a chance. This dog clambers all over me like I'm 
a sofa.

That is fine, though. Nobody ever said you were meant to warn the dog when you 
were about to have a baby. They live in a perpetual present. And plus, Spot 
will be so crippled by dog-depression, I wonder what coping strategy he would 
come up with, even if he did have the gift of forward planning.

But I think the on dit is that you warn your existing child. This can be a 
very simple process. My friend just pointed to her stomach and said "baby", and 
her son spontaneously said "sister". Job done. She doesn't have to mention it 
again until she's explaining why his universe has totally ended - and he has to 
move out of his cot. Her son is actually a week younger than T, but ... well, I 
don't want to call T a div, he has been busy with something else, evidently.

I've tried the pointing thing: he is poised between suspicion and no interest 
at all. I can see it from his perspective, to be honest - you spend your whole 
life showing them things that are either incredibly brightly coloured, or make 
an amazing noise, or taste delicious, and suddenly you're expecting a whole 
fandango about your stomach, which contains an essentially abstract future 
relationship and doesn't even have a see-through panel.

Instead of complaining about the deficiencies of my physiology, I should be 
reading him one of those you're-about-to-have-a-sibling books, of which there 
is an entire canon. For some reason I object to them all. There's one 
incredibly metaphorical one, where you are the house, and inside the house is a 
tiny 9lb person, but it is somehow conveyed to the reader that they lived in 
the house once, as well. Gah, I don't know. I wasn't really concentrating, and 
I am profoundly dubious about its narrative methods. If I expect him to 
understand this level of allegory, I may as well read him the Bible, and let 
him extrapolate his feelings about siblinghood from there.

My mother says that when I was born, she fashioned an enormous doll for my 
sister, so that she could vent her aggression on it, in a kind of 
voodoo-meets-the-70s model of child development. There's some ironical or 
extreme ending to this story, such as she set fire to it or something ... can't 
remember, but this is possibly at the root of my foot-dragging. You never hear 
anything good about a toddler and a new baby, do you? Nobody ever says: "Oh 
yes, he's really delighted by his new tired parents who squabble all the time, 
and the tiny baby who doesn't even do as much as the newborn hedgehog off 
CBeebies." The best you get is a diplomatic, "Oh, it gets a lot easier when 
they start to smile," or, "Well, at least he's too young to talk. My friend 
with the talking toddler told her she thought her real mummy had died, and this 
cold stranger had come instead."

I did not think this through. I bought the propaganda about siblings being 
fun. They're not fun for years. They're not fun until you're about 25. Before 
then, they are just the agents of your devastating dethronement - possibly a 
good thing in the long term, and for wider society; no fun at all while it's 
happening. I did not think this through! I am in denial again. I am denying the 
whole process of getting it out in one piece, and I have added a new layer of 
blinkers-down idiocy about how it's going to go down in the rest of the house.

And while I'm listing the deficiencies of my imagination, I am still somewhat 
ambivalent and queasy about hosting a creature in the first place. Too late for 
these thoughts, but I wonder if I should tell T there's a puppy in there? It 
could scarcely sound more improbable, and it might get his attention.
