
You will need: 
A selection of fabrics 
transparent ruler 
A cutting mat 
Rotary knife 
Batting (the filling that goes inside the quilt) 
Sharp scissors 
Lots of pins and safety pins 
A needle and thread or sewing machine 
A pattern - either design your own or find inspiration in a book or online
 Step 1. 

1. Once you've decided on your design, divide it into 15-30cm squares (called 
blocks, made up of smaller shapes). Working on each block individually is more 
manageable than doing a whole quilt at once.
 Step 2. 

2. Wash and iron your fabric. Cut into the shapes needed for the pattern using 
your paper templates. Be sure to allow 6mm extra per square for seaming. Once 
you have cut out all the pieces, lay them out on the floor to check the pattern.
 Step 3. 
3. Now it's time to start sewing. Sandwich two patches together, with the 
right side of the fabric facing inwards, and using a basic running stitch, sew 
them together up one side.
 Step 4. 
4. Join more patches until you have made a block (a block is one square 
portion of the whole design). Once all the blocks are completed, sew them 
together according to your pattern. That's the quilt top done. Iron to flatten 
out seams.
 Step 5. 
5. Spread out a plain piece of fabric, which will be the back of your quilt, 
and place the batting on top. Both the fabric and batting should be cut to the 
same size as your quilt top, which you now lay on top of the batting, right 
side up.
 Step 6. 
6. Choose a colour of thread that goes with the quilt design, then, starting 
in the centre of the quilt and working outwards, sew through all three layers 
around the individual blocks, or in lines across your whole quilt.
 Step 7. 
7. Finally, make the binding, a border that protects the seams and adds a more 
finished look. Cut four separate strips of fabric, about 12cm wide and of the 
same length as each side of your quilt, plus 25mm spare.
 Step 8. 
8. Make a 6mm fold along each of the long edges and iron it, then fold the 
whole strip in half, lengthways.
 Step 9. 
9. Pin one side of the strip along the edge of the quilt top, then flip it 
over and pin the strip to the backing. Then sew both sides in place. Repeat 
along the other three sides of the quilt. You're done.
