
Is there such a thing as “the perfect dress”?

Sara, by email

Ahhh, The Perfect Dress, The Perfect Shoe, The Perfect Hair, The Perfect 
Lipstick: show me a fashion magazine that does not promise to reveal one of 
those things and I’ll show you something that is not a fashion magazine. And 
like you, Sara, I believed that such a quarry – the perfect something – 
existed, somewhere, somehow, if only I had the knowledge, time and money to 
squirrel it out. But then I learned something, and in order to illustrate what 
I learned I’m going to tell you a fascinating tale about one of the first men 
with whom I had a serious relationship: Mario, fromSuper Mario Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/super-mario>.

It is possible that some youngsters out there, those born after 1990, are not 
entirely au fait with Mario (and hi there, youngsters! Welcome). Perhaps they, 
in this age ofGrand Theft Auto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/grand-theft-auto>, do not fully 
appreciate the charms of Super Mario Brothers’ two dimensional, vice-free 
world. It is even more likely that they have never even seen this endearingly 
flattened world, with its smiling clouds and strange flat trees. Well, like the 
maitre’d in Ferris Bueller, I weep for the future because Super Mario has the 
kind of simple charm and easy pleasure that GTA cannot replicate. There’s just 
something so soothing about playing Super Mario, where the worst violence 
you’ll encounter is a fire-hurtling turtle, which is so much more civilised 
than, say, killing prostitutes in GTA.

As you might have gathered by now, I spent an enormous amount of time in Super 
Mario’s world as an adolescent. On the console, on the Game Boy, it was me and 
Mario all the way and I invested hours of my young life trying to find that 
damn princess, always, it seemed, in the castle that was just one level above 
the one I reached. Until, that is, one memorable afternoon when I finally – 
finally! – found her. The validation! There were fireworks, there was climactic 
music – the princess even appeared on screen and thanked me (Mario)! It was 
immense, I tell you. No winner of the Nobel prize felt as much self-pride as I 
did that afternoon, seeing the princess liberated at last. I half expected 
confetti to come raining down from the sky to mark my achievement. But that is 
not what happened.

No, what happened instead, to my incredulity, was the game automatically 
started all over again, back at level one, with Mario off on his quest again. I 
couldn’t believe it. I’d finished it! I’d liberated the princess! And now I was 
supposed to do it again? I switched off the console in disgust and turned to 
the more intellectual pursuit of watchingHome and Away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2009/feb/10/australian-soap-home-away-20>
. That’ll show ’em.

But when I became a woman, I put away childish things. Instead, I replaced my 
search for the princess in Super Mario land with a new search – a search for 
the perfect handbag. I’m not entirely sure where this obsession started, or 
why. Certainly there is no justification for it. Of all the many true moments in
Viv Albertine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/01/the-slits-viv-albertine-punk-violence-domesticity>
’s brilliant memoir Clothes, Clothes, Clothes … the one that made me feel this 
woman’s wisdom most strongly was when she detailed her current style. There, 
listed among references to Topshop, Phillip Lim and charity shops was this 
little nugget: “Not into bags.” And quite right, too, Viv, I thought. It is 
simply idiotic to spend money on something that you use to carry money in, that 
gets dumped on train carriage floors and flung about on your elbow in all 
weathers. Ridiculous!

And yet, and yet. Maybe it’s because I don’t wear high heels, so designer 
shoes don’t appeal (why spend money on something that hurts?), and clothes seem 
too temporal to invest in too heavily, but bags it is for me. Maybe I just 
really like handbags. I don’t know, there is no way of justifying this, or even 
explaining it. All I know is, any time I fancy a bit of procrastination these 
days, instead of getting out the ol’ Nintendo console, I look up classic 
designer handbags online and treat myself to a bit of bag porn.

So it happened, a few months ago, that I finally finished writing a book and a 
cheque arrived from my publisher. I promptly took a chunk out of the cheque, 
got on the tube into town and bought a bag I’d been lusting over online for 
literally a decade. Oh reader, I had rescued my princess – it really was, as I 
knew it would be, The Perfect Bag. My search was over at last. I couldn’t wait 
to show it off so I took it to lunch with two friends who have a similarly 
highly developed appreciation of bags, and they cooed gratifyingly. Towards the 
end of the lunch, I noticed one of the friends, Sali, sling a handbag up her 
shoulder. I looked closer: Oh Lord, it was beautiful. Black and elegant and so 
grown-up. Making a squawk of despair, I asked to try it – I couldn’t believe 
it, it was The Perfect Bag. The princess was locked in the castle again and I 
was back at level one.

So don’t listen when anyone tells you something is The Perfect One, dear 
readers. Take it from my own bitter experience: the search – heck, the NEED – 
never ends.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/01/ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
