
What does my statue say about me? 

“Wagner is my biggest hero. I’m obsessed. His work has such philosophical 
depth. I want a marble one – that’ll take a few pay cheques yet.”


And what it really says

Oh God, Wagner <https://www.theguardian.com/music/richard-wagner>. Beloved of 
Tory politicians and those who find themselves moved to tears by every single 
instrument in an orchestra all playing at once. Wagner composed some wonderful 
music and, with hisTristan chord <http://www.monsalvat.no/tristanchord.htm>, he 
pushed classical composing into our contemporary world. (A side point: Wagner 
is deemed, by some, to be beyond the pale. He was also an antisemite, and 
Hitler loved him. Whether you can separate the creator’s personality from their 
creation is up to you.)

Anyway, we’re not just talking Wagner here, are we? We’re talking a purple 
Wagner statue with his hands up, conducting us – or telling us to shush, at 
least. James may think his statue tells us that he’s a Wagner fan, but 
actually, it says more. His Wagnerine figurette is like a purple pet, its size, 
colour and waving arms rendering it more ridiculous than James perhaps 
intended. That’s the thing with Wagner, though. One person’s dramatic emotion 
is another’s daft pomp. I wonder what visitors feel when confronted with it. Do 
they quiver with vibrating passion? Or do they think: “Hmm, that might look 
better with an ashtray on his head”?

James is wearing a Joy Division T-shirt. (Mixed messages: it’s stonewash and 
worn close to the heart, like a gym T-shirt rather than a band one.) Joy 
Division are a very emotional band and, like Wagner, their emotion comes from 
melancholy: from the the missed opportunity, the tragic finale. But Joy 
Division are about ambition beyond technique; the space in between the notes; 
anger and mourning rather than conventional passion. They are not Wagneresque. 
Meat Loaf is Wagneresque. Still, there is something wonderful about James 
wearing his T-shirt with his mad Wagner statue. He looks smiley and 
straightforward, but he is clearly full of obsession, ardour and excitement.


If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
