
Radio station 2GB and its outspoken breakfast host Alan Jones 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> breached broadcasting rules over 
statements made by Jones about climate change in 2013, the media watchdog has 
ruled.


The Australian Communications and Media Authority found that Jones had not 
taken enough care to make accurate statements about a leaked Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change report, while an attempted correction by the radio host 
was “not adequate and appropriate in all the circumstances and so did not cure 
the breach.”

In September 2013, Jones told his listeners: “What has been leaked tells us 
the report will admit that its computer drastically overestimated rising 
temperatures and over the past 60 years the world in fact has been warming at 
half the rate claimed in the previous IPCC report in 2007.”

Jones said the IPCC had “got it wrong by about 100%” and that the report 
showed the UN body doesn’t know what to do now that its “former theories of 
climate change have been disproven”.

Jones, who has long challenged the mainstream scientific view of climate 
change despite having no scientific background, subsequently offered an on-air 
correction of sorts which concluded with “basically the temperatures have all 
but stopped rising.”

Following two complaints about Jones’s comments, Acma launched an 
investigation – only for Harbour Radio, owner of the Sydney radio station, to 
challenge the watchdog’s authority. The federal court subsequently ruled that 
Acma had the right to investigate Jones.

In its ruling, Acma states 2GB broke the commercial radio code because it did 
not make “reasonable efforts to ensure that factual material was reasonably 
supportable as being accurate.”

Acma noted the rate of warming identified in the 2013 IPCC report – of 0.12C 
per decade over the past 60 years – was “very close” to the 0.13C per decade 
warming noted in the 2007 IPCC report.

Related: Talkback host Alan Jones wrong about climate salaries, media watchdog 
finds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/23/alan-jones-wrong--climate-salaries>

Acma said Jones had sourced his information from the Australian but that a 
“range of credible material threw doubt on the original article” in the 
newspaper. The Weekend Australian and the Daily Telegraph both published 
corrections to this reporting before Jones’ show.

The watchdog added that the attempted clarification was “confusing” and 
therefore wasn’t sufficient.

2GB was contacted for comment but had not responded at the time of publication.
