
C said, "This is the first time we've been on a long car journey since he 
learned to say 'out'." This isn't true. There seems to be no accuracy clause in 
our relationship. T said "out" all the way to France, about 18 days ago. But C 
is right that it's different now, since we have a new car. And T's new 
articulation is not the easiest thing to drive with.

"Out" sounds terrible. It sounds like a little man in chains. If he keeps it 
up for long enough, we'll stop and decide his car seat is too tight. I'll 
loosen the straps, we'll set off again, he'll wriggle out altogether and then 
he will be like a child from the 70s, bouncing around the car on good luck and 
a smile until we stop again. What an amazingly intelligent child, I think to 
myself. It's like a plot line from The Bourne Supremacy ("I'll trick them with 
my only word. And then I'll escape"). But of all parental neuroses of the 
modern age, the one about being restrained in a car is the one that makes most 
sense. It probably doesn't, but having him loose feels about as dangerous as 
having him riding on a skateboard alongside the car.

"Maybe we should go to Halfords before we set off?" C suggested. "For what?" 
(I wasn't being difficult; I thought that maybe we could get him a special car 
seat for super-intelligent, car-seat Houdinis.) "They probably have toys." 
Sure, they'll have toys, they'll have the kind of toys you have to get 
professionally installed in cars. They'll have in-car entertainment systems and 
DVD players better than (the crap one) we've got at home. "I'm not sure the 
smart money is on buying him outlandish stuff before he's even old enough to 
know he wants it," I said. "Is this some sophisticated, pre-emptive spoiling 
technique? Where you anticipate their demands so closely that they never get a 
chance to make them, and they grow up really, really nice?"

C tilted his head, in a temperate, you're-pregnant-and-I-am-so 
-mature-and-sounderstanding-and-full-of-love-that-I'm-not-even-going-to-sigh-in-an-expressive-way 
way, that I must say I found annoying, and said "Shall we go somewhere instead 
of Halfords?" "We could go to HMV," I suggested with sudden enthusiasm, "and 
get, like, boisterous nursery rhymes and a baby orchestration of Radiohead." 
"But then what are we going to do when I have a tantrum?" asked C.

It's the great cliche of family-building that when you have one child, it fits 
in with you and your rubbish car, and when you're about to have two, the first 
sign that you've surrendered yourself entirely to the "one's a pet, two's a 
zoo" adage is that you buy a bigger car. If you don't buy a bigger car for 
other reasons - perhaps you can't afford one, or you are already rubbish at 
parking - that's fine, but if you avoid it because you don't want to be a 
cliche, then you're an idiot. You're a cliche already, and at least in a big 
car you are a cliche with legroom.

So anyway, we get this car, with room for another car seat, and a big bit at 
the back that you can keep your dog in, but only if you've got one of those 
talking Disney dogs and you can reason with it, or you have a pet grille. 
Otherwise, the dog leaps immediately on to the front seat, the no-seatbelt, 
no-seatbelt! noise goes crackers, the dog will not wear a seatbelt, or in any 
other way co-operate, and T, almost encouragingly, shouts "Out!" all the way to 
wherever you're going, however far that might be. It's true that we haven't 
been on a long journey in this vehicle, but we've covered all the elements of a 
long journey on the way to my sister's, only without C. So I know exactly what 
it will be like, Halfords or no Halfords, and the real mystery is why I'm 
arguing. I should be agreeing to any entertainment system put my way, and 
otherwise keep my head down, as if I've never met any of them and never been in 
a vehicle of any sort.

I have one idea, which is to tape T saying "Out" before we set off, loop it 
over a Police track so that it sounds as if he's rapping, and play it all the 
way to the south-west of England. Beyond that, I'm completely blank. I might 
just get some earplugs.
