
• Wild flowers, including sorrel, are allowed to rub shoulders with cultivated 
plants, but Gerritsen has discovered that this style of casual planting demands 
a strong design or the results can be messy.

• Perennials and grasses with a natural appearance are favoured throughout the 
garden, and miscanthus and elymus will still look good in winter.

• The Indian rain tree, Koelreuteria paniculata, has upright candelabras of 
yellow flowers in summer, when few other trees bloom, and a fiery autumn colour.

• Kaatje's Garden, as this area is known, is formal in layout, yet is really a 
satire on the formal garden, with its absurd yew and box topiary in the centre.

• This is a plantsman's garden, so the lawn around the topiary has been 
replaced with gravel, encouraging some of the rarer perennials and grasses to 
self-seed.

Henk Gerritsen is destined to get only a footnote in the history of gardening 
when he deserves a full chapter. Following the philosophy of "wild planting in 
a tight design", he has explored naturalistic planting for 30-plus years. Piet 
Oudolf is undoubtedly more commercially savvy, having turned these ideas into a 
global brand, but Gerritsen can take credit for pushing at the edges and 
developing a new approach.

Priona, in Schuinesloot, was started in 1978 with Anton Schlepers. Gerritsen 
describes the design principle simply: "What is straight should be curved, what 
is curved should be straight." So in a garden where the walls or fences are 
straight, the paths and other landscaping should be erratic, with sloping 
paths, curved hedges and arcing borders. Conversely, in a shapeless garden, 
straight lines are needed.

Gerritsen's philosophy is to respect the full cycle of life, allowing wild and 
cultivated plants to grow side by side in natural-looking environments. Weeds 
and pests are tolerated as essential parts of the beauty of the garden. His 
work always has an unexpected element to it. The lawn is interrupted by a group 
of topiarised box, unmistakably a group of chickens with eggs. Or is it? A 
closer examination shows headless chickens and oversized eggs (prionatuinen.com 
<http://www.prionatuinen.com>).
