
Ministers are facing calls to back down on key elements of their trade union 
crackdown, after theHouse of Lords <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> 
voted against changes that could have reduced Labour’s funding by millions of 
pounds.

The government was overwhelming defeated by 320-172 after peers voted to back 
a cross-party committee saying the overhaul to funding should be restricted to 
new members only.

Ministers had proposed trade unionists would have to agree in writing every 
five years to pay into their organisation’s political fund, rather than the 
current system of automatically contributing unless they opted out. The bill 
gave the unions only three months to get a union member’s signature assenting 
to the payment of the levy.

Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> estimates the legislation 
could cost it a loss of income of at least £35m across a five-year parliament 
and potentially up to £8m a year.

However, peers voted to exempt the 4 million trade unionists who pay into the 
political fund in a move that would hand a temporary reprieve to Labour if not 
overturned in the House of Commons.

The lords also voted by 320-181 to commission an independent review and pilots 
of electronic ballots for strike action before making changes that would 
require a turnout of 50%.

The defeats came after the government rejected the recommendations of a 
cross-party committee on the trade union bill, which called for a rethink.

Responding for the opposition, Angela Smith, Labour’s leader in the House of 
Lords, said the resounding defeat showed the government had made a poor case. 
“Ministers should rethink their opposition to the recommendations made by Lord 
Burns’ cross-party committee,” she said.

“Those proposals would certainly not be pain-free for the Labour party but 
they suggest a proportionate, reasonable and practical compromise. A compromise 
that would allow the government to fulfil its manifesto commitment without 
placing unrealistic demands on the trade union movement.


“I also hope Conservative MPs and others take time to read the recommendations 
of Lord Burns’ committee and the evidence it took, and to then respond in an 
equally reasonable way when this issue comes to the floor of the House of 
Commons after Easter.”

Lord Kerslake, the former head of the civil service who is now an independent 
crossbencher, led the amendment on electronic ballots, saying it was a “tried 
and tested” way of increasing participation.


The bill aims to impose a minimum 50% turnout in strike ballots, with key 
public sector strikes requiring the backing of at least 40% of those eligible 
to vote.

“If we are to apply these high tests before industrial action can be taken, 
then it is incumbent on us to provide trade unions with the best practical 
means available to achieve the full participation of their members,” Kerslake 
said.
