


Before too long, most people living in England will find they have a directly 
elected mayor in their area, making big decisions on transport, economic 
development, skills, further education, and possibly public health and 
policing. These mayors will sit at the heart of devolution deals, agreed 
between central government and local areas, which will see accountability and 
responsibility decentralised.

Beyond elections, there will be quite limited local mechanisms for holding 
these mayors to account. True, combined authorities – bodies made up of elected 
councillor leaders from across the area – will have a role in decision-making. 
These combined authorities in turn must establish overview and scrutiny 
committees of local councillors, to hold decision-makers to account – mirroring 
the arrangements which apply to most local authorities.

But the existence of these new structures is not in itself a guarantee of 
accountability. There needs to be an active effort by mayors and local councils 
to ensure these arrangements really work in the way intended.

Poor accountability will lead to services feeling and looking just as remote 
as they do when directed from London

Nationally, the systems for accountability seem, oddly, rather stronger. 
Devolution deals give government significant powers to hold local areas to 
account for their delivery under the deal. Funding comes with strings attached 
and can be withheld if expectations are not met. Whitehall is keen to continue 
to assert its authority – and parliament is keen to support it. Recently, the 
Commons public accounts committee (PAC) placed devolution deals alongside major 
national schemes likee-borders in highlighting the risks 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/home-office-e-borders-and-successor-programmes/> 
of huge amounts of public money being spent without parliamentary oversight. 
But this fails to take account of the fact that effective oversight will work 
best if it works at local level.

A few years ago I proposed that government departments produce accountability 
systems statements – statements for each part of government, setting out who 
was responsible for what and what that responsibility meant in practice. It was 
intended to safeguard the process of decentralising power from Whitehall to 
other bodies. The PAC recently reported that these system statements, which 
first came into use in 2012, are not being consistently drafted nor used 
especially effectively. While a statement alone is not a guarantee of an 
effective system, it is pretty hard to have effective accountability without it.

What are the risks if this lesson isn’t learned? 

Related: Without clarity and local scrutiny we risk the prize of devolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/20/clarity-local-scrutiny-devolution-regions-accountability>

What will happen if we fail to develop robust systems for accountability at 
local level? The first risk is that devolution will be anything but – a 
decentralisation of responsibility while power remains firmly at the centre. A 
tussle of power and responsibility between those at local and national level 
will only ever be won by Whitehall, which has the interest and the power to 
maintain the status quo.

The second is that devolution will fail to deliver the outcomes which have 
been promised. The only way that devolution will be a success is if local 
politicians are able to take more power to develop and implement creative, 
exciting ways to improve local people’s lives. Poor or non-existent 
accountability will lead to services feeling and looking just as remote as they 
have done when directed from London.

It is easy to slip into the assumption that all safeguards and systems for 
accountability must be designed centrally and to say that without that central 
prescription, we can go no further. But I think that, imperfect as the 
governance arrangements around devolution may be, it would be a mistake to use 
this as an excuse for delay. Areas with devolution deals in place will have to 
take it upon themselves to develop systems that will give local people 
confidence that deals will be implemented in their interests, and that they 
will have an opportunity to influence this implementation.

A governance framework

Related: The new wave of English mayors: power to the people or fresh 
bureaucracy? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/03/english-mayors-power-bureaucracy-devolution>

This moves us on to the question of how councils might go about creating these 
systems. TheCentre for Public Scrutiny <http://www.cfps.org.uk/> (a body which 
I chair, and which is funded by the Local Government Association to provide 
independent advice to local authorities on governance-related issues) has 
recently suggested that groups of councils forming themselves into combined 
authorities for the purpose of devolution should develop a governance framework.

This framework would set out how councils would develop policy and make 
decisions, how they would monitor and review their performance and – critically 
– how the public would be actively involved in this work. It also proposes 
that, throughout the devolution process, there are repeated opportunities for 
engaging the public, and a wider range of elected councillors, which should be 
capitalised upon. As deals are finalised, proper planning needs to go into 
designing high-profile ways for elected councillors to challenge and hold to 
account the way deals are implemented, modified and recast.

It’s not too late to pick up that task now, but the further government and 
local areas go down the road of assuming that all good governance hinges on the 
power and role of the mayor, the greater the risks in not recognising that 
accountability is about much more than that one person. I hope that those 
currently thrashing those deals out pause to think about scrutiny, about 
accountability and about the public – and act to ensure that the decisions they 
make properly represent what local people really want and need from the state.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
