
We are on the plane to Las Vegas. All of us except Sam, my 21-year-old, who is 
looking after the house. We hope. My mother's wish to see the Grand Canyon 
before her sight gets too bad, has led me to organise an ambitious (or foolish) 
family road trip. First stop Las Vegas, then the Grand Canyon, followed by 
Yosemite national park. I have planned everything obsessively (even where to 
eat en route to the Grand Canyon). For this is not just any old expensive 
holiday but a thank- you to my mother for the help she has always given me with 
the children.

"We'll make sure everyone gets to do something they really want to do," I say, 
sounding like a cross between a schoolteacher and a tour guide.

"Go to a theme park," say the girls.

"Not go to a theme park," says J.

"I'm happy to do whatever everyone else wants to do," says my mother.

We are starting in Las Vegas, as it will be fun for the kids (excessive hotels 
with amazing pools, cheap breakfast buffets) and it's only five hours to the 
Grand Canyon. I also read a travel article about how Las Vegas was trying to 
appeal to families. The first inkling I have that the city has failed is on the 
plane.

I'd been fretting about getting Flora a sky cot but she's the only baby and 
we're the only family on board. Everyone else is part of a stag or hen do. Half 
way into the flight, just as I've got Flora off to sleep and am ready for a 
nice glass of wine, there's an announcement that the alcohol has run out.

So it's a long 10-hour journey. We get off the plane and walk straight into an 
oven – it must be more than 30C. I worry that Flora will overheat, but within 
minutes we're in sub-zero air-conditioning and I have to put her cardigan on.

I was assured that the Planet Hollywood hotel would be ideal for the children, 
who would love the film memorabilia. It turns out that their hotel room has 
props from Natural Born Killers (18).

Both our rooms overlook the hotel pool where rock music is blaring (as it does 
24 hours, all over the hotel including the lifts) and there's a bikini 
competition.

To get to anywhere you have to go through the casino. It's highly regulated; 
children must not step off the carpeted thoroughfare into the gaming area, 
although they'd have to be blind to miss the women pole dancing and the 
croupiers wearing scanty lingerie.

Our hotel also has a peep show, advertised on all the lift doors on giant 
posters of women with enormous breasts. Desperate not to appear like a low-life 
mother who has dragged her children along so she can play the slots, I tell 
anyone who will listen that we are only passing through on the way to take my 
mother to the Grand Canyon. But the children and my mother don't care – they 
love the over-the-top hotels: a gondola ride in the Venetian hotel, marvelling 
at Caesars Palace and going up the Vegas version of the Eiffel tower.

It's a relief to leave the city of sin behind. We'll come back one day without 
the kids, says J, who's had a brief go at roulette and lost. By that time I'll 
have a walking frame, I tell him, which is actually what a lot of people 
playing the slots do have next to them.

We start playing 20 questions – in which you have to guess who someone is 
pretending to be. Lydia, eight, is an American soap actor. It turns out she is 
Holly Madison, star of Planet Hollywood's peep show. Lydia has, unnoticed by 
us, committed her biography to heart. So not quite unscathed then.
