
My kitchen is … absolutely packed to the rafters. No one is allowed to open 
the cupboards apart from me – in fact, the whole thing is pretty much a no-go 
zone for everyone other than myself, apart from when we have dinner parties. We 
have a small beer table that should only seat six, but we’ve had up to 15 
people crammed around it. We’ve lots of artwork on the walls, and the 
hand-painted signs you find in butchers’ shops. There’s a mock-up cover of 
Observer Food Monthly my sister made for me when I graduated from Leith’s 
Cookery School – I’m dressed up as a hotdog.

My favourite kitchen tool is … my wooden spoon with the extra long handle. I’m 
on my fifth one – I don’t like it when a wooden spoon retains the residue of a 
curry, say, so I have a different one for a number of uses.

My storecupboard staple is … Marmite. I feel lost without it in the house. I 
have it every day on toast, in bolognese, sometimes right off the spoon.

When I’m starving I … make puttanesca, because it’s made with things I always 
have in my cupboard: tinned tomatoes, chilli, anchovies, capers, garlic, 
olives, spaghetti … They’re my favourite flavours (I’m a salt fiend), and it’s 
a one-pan dish, so it’s easy.

My culinary inspiration is … company. Having people round turns having your 
tea into a celebration. I love all those food cultures where you eat from the 
same pot, be it a West African feast or a Sunday roast. It’s so much more 
tactile and so much more interactive.

My best-kept kitchen secret is … that with the exception of curdled custard, 
there’s nothing in the kitchen that can’t be fixed – usually with cream or 
icing. People will give most things a go if it’s presented with a smile.

My current obsession is …  keeping supermarket herb plants alive. I have a 
mint plant I’ve repotted in a terracotta pot on my window sill that is 
thriving, and a coriander plant that keeps coming back to life. I talk to them 
every day, and sometimes give them sugar water.

Everything tastes better with … parmesan. It even works with sweet things, 
such as honey, figs and grapes.

When I go shopping I … stay local. I’ve an excellent Turkish grocer where I 
can get pretty much everything –spices, herbs, fresh fruit and veg. Also, a 
good bakery and a nice butcher. I essentially never really have to go anywhere 
else. I shop so frequently in the supermarkets near me for work that I avoid 
them at all costs when shopping for myself: everyone in there knows me, 
including the security guys.

For dinner tonight … I’m making pesto from leftover herbs, new season garlic 
and pistachio nuts. I’ll have it with pasta, parmesan, and maybe some fried 
anchovies, because I love them.

Rosie Reynolds is a food stylist, author of The Kitchen Shelf (Phaidon) and 
Cook regular. She will be taking over ourInstagram account  
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/>this weekend. Follow us @guardian_cook
 <https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/> for updates
