
Sitting at a table typing on their computers, our models for the Ada 
Collection at Dear Kate <http://www.dearkates.com/pages/lookbook-the-ada> were 
actually working while being photographed for our latest lookbook. Consistent 
with our previous lookbooks, we featured women who we admire because of who 
they are and what they do, not only how they look. While we have received a 
tremendous amount of positive feedback on the Ada campaign, not everyone agrees 
that women in technology were an appropriate choice as models.

As an underwear company, it is necessary to show women wearing our products. 
In an industry where models are traditionally shown lounging with their mouths 
in sexy pouts, we show the opposite. At Dear Kate, we show women who aren’t 
waiting for someone else to call the shots. They are making things happen on 
their own, which makes sense given that our line is much more than just pretty 
underwear.

Critics of the campaign have suggested that perhaps their male tech colleagues 
will not take our models seriously now that the men have been privy to photos 
of the women in underwear. Some critics have questioned whether male leaders in 
tech would pose in their underwear.As Rediff.com wrote 
<http://www.rediff.com/getahead/report/glamour-why-is-the-new-lingerie-campaign-of-dear-kate-so-controversial/20140828.htm>
, “Last time we checked the prime minister of Great Britain was rather keen to 
hear what David Beckham had to say about tackling the threat of long-term 
hunger that affects millions of children across the world, despite his numerous 
appearances in underwear campaigns.” Shouldn’t women also be taken seriously, 
regardless of what we are wearing? Clothes have no bearing on a woman’s 
intelligence or her capability to excel in the field of technology.

To answer the critics who assert that our campaign hurts the fight for women 
to be seen as more than sex objects, let me say this: no amount of clothing can 
protect women from disrespect. I will never forget the conversation I had with 
one of my good friends who is Muslim about her decision to stop wearing a 
hijab. She unveiled because covering her hair and wearing conservative garments 
did not stop men from looking her up and down, creating a feeling of violation. 
She realised that no amount of clothing ensures respect from others. Respect 
must be inherent. Mutual respect between men and women is key to a prosperous, 
happy society where we support one another, and that includes respecting 
someone’s decision to wear whatever he or she chooses.

The thought I have been most surprised by since the Ada launched is the 
striking difference in values placed on women’s bodies. They seem to vary by 
career. I wager that many of our critics would have preferred that we hire 
supermodels because that would have been “appropriate” behaviour. Why is it 
that there is a supposedly higher price to pay for women in tech if they show 
“excessive” skin? If critics are comfortable with the notion of models in 
underwear, then it is a double standard to single out women in technology. It 
implies that a woman must choose to be recognised for her body or her brain, 
never both. This awkward separation leads to shaming of women who try to fit 
into both categories and limits our ability to appreciate women as 
multi-dimensional.

Respect means not making assumptions about someone’s intelligence based on 
superficialities. The first step toward an equal world, where women are not 
judged on their appearance more harshly than men, is to behave as if it is 
already here. To do otherwise keeps us in the present, which is why must push 
forward, embrace mutual respect between all people, and thus create the future 
we desire.

Julie Sygiel is founder and CEO at Dear Kate.

Read more on this topic:

Female coders modelling underwear while they work: sexist or empowering? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/sep/05/dear-kate-women-in-tech-campaign-advert-debate>

Ability not fertility: why do we define professional women by their family? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/sep/02/rona-fairhead-bbc-telegraph-headline>
