
A dyslexic defendant who represented himself in a crown court trial – after 
being handed 790 hours of CCTV footage to review in prison to support his alibi 
– is challenging his conviction for attempted murder.
 Roger Khan. Photograph: Via Centre for Criminal Appeals 
The highly complex case involving Roger Khan, who was found guilty of taking 
part in an attack that shattered the skull of a Newton Abbot restaurant owner, 
is currently being considered by theCriminal Cases Review Commission 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/criminal-cases-review-commission> (CCRC). Khan, 
62, is serving a 30-year sentence.


The victim of the attack was Nasim Ahmed, a restaurant manager who was 
attacked outside his home with the evening’s takings on 27 October 2010. As he 
approached his front door, he was assaulted by two men – one armed with a metal 
pole.


Ahmed was beaten about the head and his face was slashed. None of the cash was 
taken. A blue baseball cap was recovered from the scene.

Khan’s experience highlights the difficulties the legal system faces when 
dealing with defendants who do not have a lawyer to argue their case in a 
criminal court – a predicament that campaigners claim is becoming more common 
due to cuts in legal aid entitlement.

 In Khan’s case, however, he was unrepresented because he had dismissed two 
sets of lawyers following disagreements over how it should be handled. Khan 
said the dispute was over the failure to obtain video evidence supporting his 
alibi. The judge ruled that the trial should, nonetheless, proceed.


The case has been taken up by a new legal charity, the Centre for Criminal 
Appeals (CCA) in London, which has submitted a second set of submissions in an 
attempt to persuade the CCRC to refer it to the court of appeal. The CCRC 
initially indicated there were insufficient new grounds for the case to be 
reopened but is now re-examining the evidence.


The day after the attack, Ahmed’s brother-in-law, Abdul Ali, was arrested. 
Khan had travelled down from London with Ali on the day of the attack.

In November that year, Khan, who is Ali’s uncle, was arrested. Both men were 
charged with attempted murder. Their attack was said to be connected to a 
family feud involving the victim and Ali.


Ali later admitted meeting two other unidentified men who had been hired to 
intimidate Ahmed. Both Khan and Ali were eventually convicted.


In their latest submission, the CCA points out: “Before trial, [Khan] was 
handed 790 hours of [municipal] CCTV footage to review to see if he could find 
himself on camera. He was not given a map of the town and had only an hour a 
day in the prison library to review the footage.


“Given these strictures, [Khan] could not raise a formal alibi defence. 
Instead he suggested that three figures spotted on film could have been him.” 
The police, it is claimed, had not studied all the municipal CCTV footage and 
were wrong therefore to leave the jury with the impression that they could not 
find Khan on it.


Additionally, more useful CCTV evidence from shops and pubs, the CCA says, was 
never obtained in time by the police or defence and was later recorded over.


DNA traces from the baseball cap were matched to Khan but the hat belonged to 
Ali. Lawyers from the CCA representing Khan told the court he wore it on the 
journey down from London but left it in the car. DNA testing shows that another 
person’s DNA was also on the cap. Khan was unable to obtain expert assistance 
to examine the evidence.


The trial had several other irregular features: one of the jurors was 
dismissed three weeks into the trial because it emerged she knew some of the 
participants’ family. Her presence, it is alleged, had by then significantly 
contaminated the jury.


Lawyers for Khan at the CCA also point to the fact eyewitness reports said two 
white men, whose descriptions do not match Ali or Khan, were seen running from 
the scene of the attack.


Emily Bolton of the CCA <http://www.criminalappeals.org.uk/>, who has worked 
on death row cases in the United States, said Khan had to carry his case papers 
“in garbage bags up and down to the cells” during the trial. “As in all English 
cases, there was no transcript,” she added. “We were eventually given the 
digital trial recording.” Volunteers spent hours transcribing the tapes.


Bolton said: “Complete trial transcript has been available as a matter of 
right in the US since 1956. British lawyers have been parachuting into death 
row cases in Mississippi and bewailing the injustices they see there – but such 
injustices are only visible when you have an actual transcript of the trial to 
see what was really going on.


“So how do we know similar casualties of justice are not taking place here in 
Britain? The Centre for Criminal Appeals, which relies on grants and donations, 
wants to change this ... by going the extra mile to bring a complete picture of 
a case to the court of appeal, not just the tip of any particular iceberg.”


In an opinion supporting the reopening of Khan’s case, Francis FitzGibbon QC, 
who is on the advisory group of the CCA, said that the CCRC had failed to give 
sufficient importance to the fact that Khan was a “vulnerable defendant”.


He said: “The nature of [Khan’s] vulnerability impeded his decision-making, so 
that his decision to dismiss his legal representatives was the product of his 
vulnerability. He was unable to participate effectively in his trial as a 
litigant in person.


“His remand status would have made it exceptionally difficult for anyone to 
engage properly with the voluminous documentary material, but it was especially 
onerous for him. He had limited access to the extensive CCTV material, some of 
which he was only able to view during the trial. His dyslexia must have made 
dealing with the case still more difficult.”


Khan only learnt to read at the age of 17, starting off with comic books he 
found in a borstal. He tried to put his criminal record, for an armed robbery 
he still denies, before the jury at his trial to demonstrate that he was 
pursued by the police on the basis of his past. At the time of his arrest he 
had been out of trouble for 15 years and had settled down with a partner.


In its provisional finding declining to refer the case to the court of appeal, 
the CCRC said: “Many of the submissions made are on the basis that [a 
barrister] could have made points more eloquently or more forcefully than was 
done by Mr Khan. However, such submissions do not constitute either new 
evidence or new argument.”


The CCRC will now examine the CCA’s further report before making a final 
decision on Roger Khan’s case.

More and more cases involving unrepresented defendants are coming before the 
courts because the financial threshold for eligibility for legal aid has been 
raised, according to Penelope Gibb, director of the charity Transform Justice.


The Ministry of Justice has denied there is a rise in the number of people 
representing themselves in crown court, saying there has been no increase in 
the number of self-represented defendants since 2010.


A spokesman for the CCRC said: “We are alert to the issues of [changes to 
eligibility for] legal aid but have not seen any increase in [claims of 
miscarriages of justice] as a result so far.”

