
I left Taiwan when I was 13, and I hardly ever go back. It’s been 20-odd 
years, yet I still feel a part of me is missing. So I’d be there, in my 
mother’s house.

I can count the number of times my whole family has been together for a meal 
on two hands. We are spread across the world – Vietnam, Japan, Hong Kong, 
France, the US... Work always keeps one or two of us away from our family 
gatherings, although we are tightly connected and communicate constantly. So, 
for this meal, I’d want everyone there.

Related: Anthony Bourdain’s final meal | My last supper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/25/sushi-sake-sukiyabashi-jiro-anthony-bourdain-last-bites>

We all have very different tastes, so whenever we do all get together, my mum 
essentially cooks a different dish for each of us. My sister loves chicken, my 
father soup, my brother only eats meat, and I love seafood and vegetables. It’d 
be each to his own.

I’d want my mother’s pig ear salad, braised, then smoked with tea and sugar, 
then sliced paper-thin and tossed with dried chilli, sesame oil, black vinegar, 
chilli oil and finely julienned green herbs. I’d also want her pickled 
mackerel: diced then quick-fried until the skin is crispy, then sautéed with 
chilli paste, vinegar and a little bit of dry shrimp then everything put in a 
jar and left to marinade for a week. With plain rice. I’d only want water to 
drink.

The house has been in my family for decades, a small three-storey house on a 
very old alley near the railway. You can always see the trains passing, and 
everyone knows everyone.

It is still full of my and my brother’s things: his Coca-Cola collection, a 
wall of my baseball caps from all over the world, and another wall of all the 
many cookbooks I collected when I was young. And the calligraphy my grandmother 
liked to do.

I started ordering English cookery books and magazines as a kid – it’s both 
how I learned to speak English, and how I learned to cook. One book that 
particularly stands out from that time is La Cuisine Moderne, published in 
1888. It tells you to cut the onion into dice and saute until golden brown, 
without specifying the size of the dice, the heat on which to cook or how long 
to cook for.

Cooking is very emotional: you need to focus on the details, but the only 
information you need to be told is how to cook it – “until golden brown”. You 
need tofeel the process.

André Chiang is chef-owner of Restaurant André in Singapore. Octaphilosophy: 
The Eight Elements of Restaurant André is out now (Phaidon)
