
Get influence at board level

In the social housing sector, procurement has long been seen as that little 
team you go to when a new photocopier or more kitchen units are needed. But 
increasingly the strategic contribution that procurement can offer to housing 
organisations – beyond the day-to-day sourcing of goods and services – is being 
recognised.

 Finding a procurement champion at the highest level of your organisation is 
key to gaining this recognition. One way to do this is by talking the language 
of senior colleagues and showing how purchasing can help with their individual 
agendas. For example, demonstrate how procurement can reduce repairs costs by 
giving the maintenance team a clearer idea of exactly where their money is 
being spent . Help to boost customer service standards by managing 
tenant-facing suppliers more effectively. Or support the social investment team 
by weaving community value clauses into supplier contracts.

Go beyond a policing role

Social landlord procurers are usually responsible for making sure their 
organisation complies with public purchasing laws. Unfortunately, this task has 
earned buyer’s a negative reputation, branding us as theprocurement police 
<http://www.procurementforhousing.co.uk/insight-and-opinion/latest-news/the-battle-for-hearts-and-minds-in-social-housing/>
 who slap people’s wrists if they buy outside contracts.

 To combat this, procurement officers must persuade their colleagues of the 
value that comes with co-ordinating buying centrally rather than using 
favourite suppliers. Educate others on the legal pitfalls of rogue spending but 
also show colleagues the savings they can make when purchasing from agreed 
frameworks.

 We also need to ensure that procurement isn’t seen purely as the custodian of 
financial regulations. The purchasing team has a unique vantage point and the 
commercial understanding it can provide could increase income, boost innovation 
and cut costs. Purchasers must get better at internal PR

Embrace technology

Compared to our private sector counterparts, buyers in social housing are way 
behind when it comes todigital procurement 
<http://www.procurementleaders.com/blog/my-blog--guest-blog/2014/07/31/digital-procurement-lessons-for-the-public-sector>
. E-purchasing and online tendering may be widely used and have their place 
when used correctly. However, it’s the more strategic buying technologies that 
many providers are not embracing. Things such as predictive procurement, smart 
data and real-time collaboration could all help social landlords to better 
forecast demand for certain goods and coordinate supply chains more efficiently 
right across their business so bigger savings can be made. Procurement 
technology could also help landlords build up a database of market intelligence 
to inform future buying decisions, rather than relying on suppliers for 
information.

Create good relationships with suppliers

Focusing on price above everything else can actually be counter-productive. 
Squeezing the supply chain to eat away at its margins may achieve big savings 
in the short term. However, the result is often unhappy contractors, inferior 
services and future problems such as an increased risk of legal disputes where 
suppliers exploit their position after being forced to concede low prices.

A more sustainable way of generating savings and increasing quality is to 
spend time developing lasting, mutually beneficial relationships with suppliers 
– something that often leads to fresh ideas and creative new ways to cut costs.


One area where this can have a positive impact is customer experience. Lots of 
housing organisations provide tenant-facing support through suppliers, such as 
contractors doing repairs. It’s vital that these suppliers provide the high 
level of service that the landlord itself would offer so residents see no dip 
in standards. That’s why the role of the procurement team in carefully managing 
supplier relationships is so vital – not just to customer service but to a 
range of work areas in housing organisations.

Recruit purchasing leaders with the right values

Procurement <http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/procurement> 
success in housing organisations often comes from having the right leader and 
there are a number of organisations leading the way. The pace of change around 
purchasing is much faster in the private sector with buying functions having a 
higher profile than they do in social housing.

Procurement leaders with experience of influencing a whole business are more 
likely to be able to change the perception of purchasing across a housing 
provider. This often means that the best housing procurement leaders have 
experience in other sectors. High-ranking status must also be given to 
purchasing heads so they are listened to at the top level and have the 
confidence and the mandate to drive change through.

John Wallace is head of procurement and purchasing at Anchor and will be 
speaking at social housing procurement eventPfH Live on 25 June 
<http://www.procurementforhousing.co.uk/pfh-live> 

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you 
every Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
