
Every girl knows about holiday romances. Regardless of your age or era, every 
single magazine, every single summer, comforts the broken-hearted on their 
problem pages and reiterates: don't do it.

Sunshine, sea, and cheap cocktails create a fantasy ideal that is very 
unlikely to come true. And after terribly brief run-ins with Jerome (Brittany, 
1987), and Thingummy (Cornwall, 1988), I too came to believe this and staked my 
claims a little closer to home, with nice, sensible men in nice, sensible jobs 
who were polite to my mother.

But did this work for me? It did not.

By February 2002, having just turned 30 and extricated myself from what is 
technically known as a "close thing", I persuaded two girlfriends to come on 
holiday with me. I had spent a previous February freezing to bits in 
Philadelphia, when the only respite on the weather forecast was that plunging 
necktie of America down on the right-hand side, so Miami it was.

If you are feeling single and your age, Miami is no place for you. I had never 
seen so many beautiful, young people in one place, not even in Los Angeles. 
Every single one was bronzed, lithe, spoke Spanish and louched around the place 
looking amazing. It took a while to figure out that Miami is America's major 
hunting ground for model agencies. If you look like a model, this is where to 
come to get spotted.

Regardless, it took two seconds to fall in love with South Beach, with its 
soft balmy air, beautiful art-deco buildings and heart-stoppingly strong 
cocktails. After a couple of those we struck up a chat with some women in a 
bar. "We're going to a party on a yacht," they said cheerily. "Want to come?'

Women's magazine holiday rule no. 14: on no account go somewhere you don't 
know with people you don't know in a foreign place.

Us: "Sure!" The photos of that night show us killing ourselves laughing on a 
huge luxury yacht, posing on its Versace carpets next to gold taps. In the 
background is a really hot bloke behind the bar, mixing margaritas.

Women's magazine holiday rule no. 31: don't go for the barman, for goodness 
sake, it's really, really corny.

Me: "Really want to ask out that incredibly fit bloke."

Tipsy friends: "Yeah, do it!"
 First glimpse of Andrew 'the barman' 
Women's magazine holiday rule no. 95: don't listen to your friends when 
they're drinking margaritas. They want you to do something stupid so you can 
all laugh about it later.

One dinner and one night in a bar later – he wasn't the barman, it turned out, 
but the chief engineer – I knew I was in terrible trouble. Particularly when I 
accidentally-on-purpose missed my flight and stayed on for another 10 days. 
Then flew home, unpacked and repacked my bag, and flew back across the Atlantic 
so I could sail back again in a 60m super-yacht.

Even my closest friends treated me like a 14-year-old who'd been promised an 
engagement ring at a Turkish resort. And the less said about my mother's 
reaction ("Don't sailorsdrink a lot?"), the better. I cannot begin to imagine 
what Cathy & Claire, Jackie magazine's agony aunts, would have had to say.

Anyway, I never saw him again. No, not really. As the great Carol Shields (who 
didnot write for women's magazines) once said, engineers make excellent 
husbands for writers. Nine years, two weddings (one in Scotland, one in Vegas 
with Elvis), about a million sea miles and three children down the line, I 
agree with her.

Our two-year-old's favourite song at the moment is called "Watch the Sun Come 
Up". The lyrics go: "And it was hard to distinguish / Love at first sight or 
holiday romance? / Don't care, I was lost in the moment / I really shoulda 
missed that flight."

Whatever the mags say, sometimes, you can miss the flight.
