
Chain drains are a far more attractive alternative to downpipes, and become 
instant water features when it rains and the water tumbles down the chain links.

Lemon thyme in a chequerboard pattern needs plenty of sun and shallow, 
well-drained soil. An annual trim with shears and feeding with lime will keep 
it compact.

A small raised stage can be used for musical productions, tea ceremonies and 
displays, and - importantly in a small space - it provides a dual function: it 
can also be used as occasional seating.

This is a public space, but the contemplative style and atmosphere seem to 
instil a reverence in visitors, who automatically refrain from walking on the 
gravel.

The garden can get hot in summer, and the wisteria on the pergola provides 
much-needed shade. Because it is deciduous, sunlight in winter is maximised.

Putting gardens on to roofs can be a risky business, and the garden at the 
School of Oriental and African Studies was no exception. The original pools 
began to leak and had to be drained, leaving the garden looking sad and 
unloved. But in 2001 an area for meditation and relaxation was created, away 
from the hubbub of the hectic streets of London; it also provided a welcome 
outside space for the adjacent Brunei Gallery.

This Japanese garden eliminated the troublesome pools, and the predominance of 
hard landscaping means there are now few plants to maintain and so little in 
the way of heavy soil for the structural engineers to worry about.

The designer, Peter Swift, deftly adapted the principles of Japanese garden 
design to suit the British climate. True to the Japanese tradition, the 
elements mimic nature: raked gravel imitates flowing water, the large boulders 
are islands in the river. The bones of the original garden were retained, 
including the pergola, to which timber beams were added. Green slate paving was 
cut into the sandstone, intertwining old and new.

Despite the lack of plants, the garden changes with the seasons as the stone 
and wood take on different colours when wet or dry.
