
A recent report <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/year/2015/201503/> from the 
Higher Education Funding Council for England, found that although some 38% of 
students achieved top grades for their level three BTec (three distinctions), a 
student gaining CDD at A-level was still more likely to go to university.

It’s likely this is because many BTec students take their newly gained 
practical skills and portfolio of work straight to the workplace. But 
university admissions staff say the vocational route is just as valid as 
A-levels when it comes to university applications, and students shouldn’t be 
put off. So what do they look for in BTec students, and what advice do current 
university students who studied a BTec have for applicants?

Amy Rule, 20, is currently on a placement year of her degree in public 
relations and communications at Manchester Metropolitan University. She feels 
that BTec allowed her flexibility, especially if you want to pursue a 
vocational course at university. She had originally wanted to pursue a career 
as a TV presenter, but found she had a talent for public relations during a 
work experience placement, while studying a BTec in media production at Oldham 
college. For Rule, though she changed her mind about which course to pursue, 
BTec was always an interim step before university.


Show tutors how you’re already engaged with the industries related to the 
course
Amy Rule, 20, student at Manchester Metropolitan University 
Rule advises students to “convert all your modules and results into Ucas 
points and make sure you’re crystal clear on the requirements for the courses 
you’re looking to study. Show tutors how you’re already engaged with the 
industries related to the course.

“You’ll be well ahead in terms of planning a placement year if your course has 
one. I’m working at a PR company I became aware of while doing my BTec work 
placement. Show them the confidence, maturity, and understanding you’ve gained 
from working with professionals.”

William Ibbott, 21, studied for a BTec in creative media production at 
Amersham and Wycombe college, and is now in his second year of a BA at 
Newcastle University, studying media, communications and cultural studies. 
Ibbott recommends getting to grips with what yourBTec results might be worth in 
Ucas points <http://www.universityfinder.org.uk/ucas-points-calculator.html> 
early on – and making a realistic plan based on the numbers.

“I found the response to BTec mixed at university open days, but that talking 
to course leaders directly was the best way to get a sense of how the 
university would actually consider a BTec application for a more academic 
course such as mine.”

Ibbott also advises concentrating hard on your personal statement; making the 
point that you’ve made an active, rather than default decision to apply for 
continued study: “It isn’t a given you will apply to uni if you study BTec. 
It’s the expectation from the off with A-levels that you’ll go, but with BTec 
it was a more considered decision. Show them you’ve chosen university of your 
own volition.”

Of his BTec class of 20, five now study at university and Ibbott says he would 
recommend a BTec to other people who are considering going on to study a 
degree: “If people try to discourage you from applying to uni with a BTec, 
don’t listen to them. I’m really glad I did it, it gave me the opportunity to 
work out if I wanted to go straight into work or onto further study.”

Ibbott achieved high grades, earning 400 Ucas points from his BTec. If you are 
hoping to take a course at a top university for a straight academic course, you 
may also require additional A-levels as well, according to Lucy Blackhurst, 
head of recruitment and admissions at Newcastle University.

“In order to be prepared for the academic demands of our courses, we find that 
students who present with a combination of BTec and A-levels are most 
successful, and our entrance requirements reflect this preference,” says 
Blackhurst.


But this isn’t necessarily a requirement of all courses at top universities. A 
spokesperson at Oxford University said it’s more important for tutors to see 
“evidence of how students have engaged with their subject or subjects, and how 
they studied in their own time beyond the syllabus they may be following at 
school or college.”

They also warned, however, that while work experience and extended coursework 
can all be useful, “students need to evaluate their experiences – not just list 
their achievements.”

For others, including the Royal Agricultural University, which teaches 
predominantly vocational degree courses, the most important aspect of 
application is how a candidate shows evidence of their career aspirations in a 
relevant industry.

Michael Frize, admissions tutor at University of Sheffield’s school of 
management, says he would welcome more applications from BTec students: “Ours 
is a subject that applies to real life and the world of work … BTec students 
know how theory is applied, and that’s an advantage here.

“Show us how you’ve applied your knowledge in real-life situations and why 
that excites you,” he adds.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
