
We applaud Alex Renton's courageous article about abuse and neglect in 
boarding schools ("Abuse in Britain's boarding schools: why I decided to 
confront my demons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/04/abuse-britain-private-schools-personal-memoir>
", Magazine). The suffering caused by the British habit of sending children 
away from parental love and the safety of their homes to educational 
institutions has been ignored for much too long. Materially rich but 
emotionally poor, with small classes, large playing fields but "no hugs", as 
Renton puts it – boarders lose out on a normal childhood. Children may learn to 
function competently, but at the cost of dissociation from their feelings of 
abandonment, even if there is no outright abuse. The ex-boarder may never 
develop emotional intelligence.

To most people, the inherent wrong of early boarding is obvious, as was clear 
from the majority of comments on Renton's article. For those requiring more 
convincing, the evidence is weighty and wide-ranging. Attachment theory plus 
the work of clinicians over the last two decades and now the findings of 
neuroscience leave no doubt about the psycho-emotional consequences of 
depriving children of touch, warmth and a "secure base".

The privileges of boarding education can no longer compensate its cost to our 
society. Its elitism is at odds with the goals of an inclusive liberal social 
democracy; it remains a major force in the sidelining of women and the 
maintenance of an outdated class system. If boarding once played a role in 
preparing men for the rigours and cruelties of an imperial age, our present 
interdependent world calls for a different, more complex and caring set of 
values. We call for an end to early boarding along with the privations that are 
demonstrably detrimental to children's wellbeing.

Felicity de Zulueta, Tavistock Clinic; Professor Joy Schaverien, University of 
Leeds and Sheffield University NHS Trust; Dr Susie Orbach, psychoanalyst Don 
Boyd, film director; Kate White, editor,Attachment Journal; Emerald Davis, 
Lindsay Hamilton, the Bowlby Centre; Pippa Foster, Darrel Hunneybell, Boarding 
Recovery; Nicola Miller, Russell Bowman, Simon Partridge, Boarding School 
Survivors; Dr Alastair MacIntosh, broadcaster and writer; AL Kennedy, 
broadcaster and writer; Mark Smalley, radio producer; Sally Fraser, Boarding 
School Action; Peter Saunders, NAPAC; Danny Dorling, Marston, Oxford; Nick 
Duffell, psychotherapy trainer and psychohistorian; George Monbiot; Orit Badouk 
Epstein, Attachment-based psychoanalytic psychotherapist; Michael Goldfarb, 
freelance writer; Professor Andrew Samuels, University of Essex; Barry Sheerman 
MP (former chair of the Select Committee for Children, Schools and Families); 
John Tosh, Professor of History, Roehampton University

Alex Renton's compelling account of his time at school once more exposes the 
systemic failure of the child-protection "framework". Whenever an abuse 
incident is exposed, we hear from all quarters that "everything is different 
now".  My response to this is very simple: Southbank International school, 
Hillside first school, Bishop Bell, Little Heath primary. The very recent 
failures in child protection at all these schools contradict any such 
assertions.  I was serially sexually abused at Caldicott school in 1967. I was 
the first person to file a complaint, and the multiple convictions that 
followed demonstrate that the school had been specifically targeted by 
perpetrators.  At that time, there was no requirement to report suspected or 
known abuse: it was discretionary. The situation is exactly the same today.  
Your child has no statutory right to have his or her known rape reported to 
anyone. Private schools are presented with a further conflict of interest by 
the Department for Education's "statutory guidance", because no law is broken 
for failing to report the worst news any fee-receiving institution can inflict 
on its balance sheet. 

To deliver culture change, the legislative catalyst of mandatory reporting 
must be applied to all institutional settings. Until then, children will 
continue to be abused and no one will know.  

Tom Perry @MandateNow, Amersham

We welcome Alex Renton's contribution to the debate about children living in 
institutions. In the British care system, we aim to place looked-after children 
in foster families rather than children's homes. When we know that children 
need love and attention within a family, why do we deprive boarders of this?

Suggestions that children choose to board implies that these children made an 
informed decision. This might be true for those over 16; it is not true for 
those under the "age of consent". There is a trade-off to going away to 
boarding school. Shuttered emotional development, clinging to institutional 
life, compared with growing up normally within their family and community.

Boarding Concern

London
