
Anti-rape campaigners have accused George Galloway 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgegalloway> of a "deeply disturbing 
and disappointing" attitude towards sexual violence after he claimed a rape 
allegation levelled at the WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange had no basis 
because having sex with a woman when she is asleep is not rape.

In an extraordinary and graphic speech made through a weekly online video 
broadcast calledGood Night with George Galloway 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5B4I5F05jNg>, the Respect party MP for Bradford 
West addressed allegations of rape, sexual molestation and unlawful coercion 
made by two women – known as woman A and woman B – Assange met on a visit to 
Stockholm in August 2010, including having sex with one of them while she was 
asleep. Assange strongly denies the allegations.

"Even taken at its worst, if the allegations made by these two women were 
true, 100% true, and even if a camera in the room captured them, they don't 
constitute rape," Galloway said. "At least not rape as anyone with any sense 
can possibly recognise it. And somebody has to say this.

"Woman A met Julian Assange <http://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>, 
invited him back to her flat, gave him dinner, went to bed with him, had 
consensual sex with him, claims that she woke up to him having sex with her 
again. This is something which can happen, you know. I mean, not everybody 
needs to be asked prior to each insertion."

Lawyers and anti-rape campaigners said Galloway was wrong and the law is clear 
that consent is required every time someone has sex.

Galloway said he was speaking out because "a reign of intellectual terror has 
descended in Britain" on this issue and he believed the sexual assault claims 
were part of a "setup" intended to deliver Assange into the hands of the US 
authorities angered at his publication of state secrets.

"It is staggering just how ignorant, factually and morally incorrect George 
Galloway can be," said Katie Russell, spokeswoman forRape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/rape> Crisis England and Wales. "It is 
very concerning that an elected MP should display such ignorance of the law for 
all the women and men he represents. It sends a negative message to all the 
women and girls who have experienced sexual violence and a disturbing message 
to perpetrators. He says he doesn't believe these women or these allegations 
and that is a very powerful statement because every woman or girl who has made 
an allegation of sexual violence deserves to have that treated fairly."

A magistrates court has already ruled 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/Misc/2011/5.html> that: "What is alleged here 
is that Mr Assange 'deliberately consummated sexual intercourse with her by 
improperly exploiting that she, due to sleep, was in a helpless state'. In this 
country that would amount to rape."

The high court also ruled 
<http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWHC/Admin/2011/2849.html>: "It is clear that 
the allegation is that he had sexual intercourse with her [woman A] when she 
was not in a position to consent and so he could not have had any reasonable 
belief that she did."

In his broadcast Galloway said: "Some people believe that when you go to bed 
with somebody, take off your clothes, and have sex with them and then fall 
asleep, you're already in the sex game with them. It might be really bad 
manners not to have tapped her on the shoulder and said: 'Do you mind if I do 
it again?.' It might be really sordid and bad sexual etiquette, but whatever 
else it is, it is not rape or you bankrupt the term rape of all meaning."

Sandy Brindley, national co-ordinator for Rape Crisis Scotland said Galloway's 
comments were "very unhelpful" and supported an enduring but false notion of 
"real" or "serious" rape.

"It can be just as devastating to be raped asleep by someone you know as it is 
to be raped by a stranger in the street," she said.

Assange remains holed up in the Ecuadorean embassy in Knightsbridge, as he 
attempts to avoid extradition to Sweden where he is wanted for questioning over 
sexual assault claims. The lawfulness of a European arrest warrant issued by 
the Swedish authorities wasconfirmed in May by the UK's supreme court 
<http://www.bailii.org/uk/cases/UKSC/2012/22.html>.

Assange and his supporters believe that if he travels to Stockholm he may be 
rendered to the United States and charged with espionage for publishing leaked 
military logs from Iraq and Afghanistan and highly classified diplomatic cables 
from US embassies around the world. They fear he faces life in prison, or even 
the death penalty in the US.

On Twitter, Galloway reacted dismissively to the uproar surrounding his 
remarks.

"Oh how this 'liberal' chorus of Pavlovian reaction must delight the 
Pentagon!" he tweeted. "Oh my, what a lot of 'liberal' useful idiots the Empire 
can count on. It's about WIKILEAKS stupid...!"

In a characteristically hectoring broadcast, Galloway also addressed 
allegations made by the second woman against Assange, over which he is wanted 
for questioning.

"She claimed that while she did have consensual sex with him, the condom 
ripped and yet he continued to do it," he said. "Now you wouldn't just need to 
be in the room with the two of them to know the truth of this allegation. I 
don't want to take the biology too far, but you would actually need to be 
somewhere located inside the woman to know if that allegation were true. And if 
it were true, is it rape?"

The Respect MP concluded by declaring: "I think the whole thing is a setup. I 
don't understand how so many of you can't see that. If he did these things, 
he's a rat. But the United States empire, the British empire, the imperial 
system that around the world is slaughtering human beings by the million, 
cutting their throats, starving them to death, leaving them to die of poverty 
and avoidable disease in their millions, is a much bigger rat, no? Imperialism 
is a much bigger rat than Julian Assange, no? So why would you want Assange to 
be delivered to the United States and silenced for ever, unless you were on the 
side of empire."
