
I'm constantly amazed by how many people just rock up here unannounced. I'm 
mostly amazed that they actually find the place. We've given verbal and visual 
directions to plenty of people who have spent hours trying to find us. Those 
people probably get lost because we live in an area so rural that there's one 
postcode for a dozen houses, making satnav fairly useless. And since we live a 
few hundred metres beyond a derelict house, many people see the ruin and just 
turn back, assuming they've gone wrong.

And yet every week we get a surprise visitor. The other day I was doing the 
washing up ("It's always me") and there was a knock at the door. Before I even 
saw who it was I glimpsed an orange campervan parked under one of the big beech 
trees. A man stepped into view. You couldn't make it up: he had a goatee and a 
wooden leg covered in a leopard-skin tight. When he spoke he had a foreign 
accent. "I'm looking for a writer who has started a commune in the woods," he 
said.

"Aha," I said hesitantly, pained by the word "commune". I was tempted to point 
at the horizon and say "over there". But we invited him in, gave him a cup of 
tea and offered him lunch.

"Lunch?" he said. "Zat would be OK." My wife Fra and I exchanged glances: 
there was something about the shoulder-shrug response to our generosity that 
amused us. So we had lunch and answered his questions and went for a walk in 
the woods. And then off he went.

It happens all the time. The other day we had evacuated the place of children 
and guests for an afternoon to give Fra the rare joy of having time at home 
entirely to herself. When we all got back, we expected to find her fast asleep 
or at least refreshed. But there were tea cups all over the table and she 
rolled her eyes. "The family of some friend of an ex-girlfriend of yours turned 
up," she said.

We were in the middle of lunch the other day when three pensioners shook the 
bell by the gate. One of them was a geologist who had written his doctoral 
thesis about the quarry on our land 50 years ago. He was slightly shocked and 
disorientated by the fact that trees had so thoroughly reclaimed the land. And 
then just this week a car rolled up and a lady in a long gown with a flamboyant 
hem got out. She was a herbalist from London who had heard about our project 
and wondered whether she could hunt for healing herbs.

Now I enjoy these unexpected arrivals and would be genuinely sad if they ever 
stopped. One of the drawbacks of living in the sticks is that people don't just 
drop by on the walk home. No one walks home via us. We are, as I say, at the 
end of a bumpy track beyond a ruin. So it's good that people surprise us. No 
one turns up empty-handed or empty-headed. I enjoy the sense of adventure that 
comes from having a gate that's almost always, and always very publicly, open. 
And I've often said that a community only avoids being elitist or eugenic if it 
has space for the uninvited. And yet… if I'm honest, I've found all these 
unexpected visitors one of the hardest adjustments to make. Having complete 
strangers walk through the door, blithely using the loo or the kettle, just 
isn't something I'm used to.

I've spent a long time trying to analyse my unease and talking it through with 
other people here. Maybe it's natural to feel mildly peeved. It's not something 
any of us is really used to. Maybe I'm just a hypocrite: good at pontificating 
on the theory, not so strong on practising it. Or maybe it's actually the 
opposite, that we're too anxious about the practice. One of our long-term 
guests reckons we're too hospitable, that we should be more taciturn and not 
stress about bending over backwards every time someone rolls up unannounced. I 
think part of the problem is that this house is so small that there are few 
buffers or boundaries: anyone can stumble into the heart of the place and I'm 
probably anxious about what they're looking for here, and especially what they 
will find.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
