
Brian Boag, the University of Salford’s new Interim Dean for the School of 
Nursing, Midwifery, Social Work & Social Sciences, talks about academic career 
opportunities at the university, his career path to date and discusses why he 
thinks Salford is the best place to develop your academic career in nursing and 
midwifery.


1. When did you start your career in healthcare?

I started out in nursing in the late 1980s, specialising in emergency care. I 
have been fortunate and worked across the UK in practice and education and have 
seen many changes to the delivery of health and social care.
 Brian Boag, University of Salford’s new Interim Dean for the School of 
Nursing, Midwifery, Social Work & Social Sciences. Photograph: Salford 
University 
2. Why did you become interested in a career in higher education?

I always loved teaching students and patients and I was given the chance to do 
guest lecturing spots on assessing and working with patients in the A&E 
department and I got hooked from there. I have had some great times teaching 
and seeing a student grow into their roles and achieve their dream of getting a 
degree is the most rewarding part of my career .

3. What attracted you to working at University of Salford?

It was an obvious choice for me. The university is the largest provider of 
health and social care education in the North West – we have over a 1000 new 
students per year! This means that I can play a meaningful part in the 
development of professionals and I get to work with some of the best and most 
dedicated staff in the UK. We have a mission to be a centre of creative 
pedagogy and all the team contribute to this with dedication and commitment, 
the student is always first at Salford - something we are very proud of.

4. Tell us about the School of Nursing, Midwifery, Social Work and Social 
Sciences

The School is one of the largest in the university and has five directorates: 
Pre-Qualifying Nursing; Midwifery, Counselling & Psychotherapy; Social Work; 
Social Sciences & post graduate and post qualification studies. We currently 
have a team of over 300 academics who deliver courses to over 3000 students and 
regularly publish and undertake global research. We work closely with our local 
health care and social providers to provide some of the best placements 
available and our graduates are known throughout the UK and the world as highly 
professional, highly educated and dedicated professionals.

5. The University of Salford’s vice-chancellor, professor Helen Marshall, 
describes you as an “excellent and inspiring leader”. How do you plan to 
inspire the university’s healthcare academics of the future?

I am just part of a team and whilst flattered by the comment I believe it is 
because of the team of staff who work hard and are dedicated to their roles 
that make the difference. We are committed to the best in new teaching styles, 
we have invested nearly 2 million in a new simulation centre to teach nurses 
and midwives, we are building a state of the art counselling and psychotherapy 
suite to allow students to work with practitioners and develop their skills. We 
are investing heavily in the teaching experience developing new ways of 
learning, utilising digital and on-line learning, we have two of the top 50 
most influential social media educators in the School and we are one of the 
world’s leading universities when leading change.

6. You’re currently recruiting for lecturers and professors for the School, 
what advice would you give to those considering becoming academics?

Coming from a clinical background I appreciate the varied levels of 
experiences one can develop within the sector. I’m recruiting within several 
areas such as children’s and young people’s nursing, mental health nursing, 
midwifery, criminal justice, advanced practice, non-medical prescribing, 
neonatal care, and practice and placement development. It’s a great time to 
join the team and the best advice I’d give would be passionate about your 
subject, enjoy teaching and sharing knowledge and come to us with an open mind 
ready to give us your ideas. Our School’s strength is the staff that work here 
and we want you to be part of that.

7. What research is carried out in the School?

This is an exciting time to join the academic community within the School as a 
result of the significant investment in research from the university. The 
leadership within the School have significant ambition of further enhancing the 
research profile of individuals and groups within the School, maintaining 
research excellence and building on solid foundations for meaningful impact. 
Research within the School is organised within a School-wide Research Centre.

8. What are the main research priorities in the School?

This Research Centre currently comprises 4 groups: Sustainable Housing & Urban 
Studies Unit (SHUSU); Children, Young People & Families (CYP); Knowledge and 
Place; Long-term Conditions, in addition we host the Salford Institute for 
Dementia. Two further groups are in development: the Criminal Justice Hub and 
Society, Culture and Digital Lives. In addition, there exists a number of 
informal groupings which come together to discuss shared interests within the 
framework of the broader Research Centre.

 We are keen to develop our research activities even further and we want to 
hear from you, if you have a research area for which you are known and it fits 
within our brief then we will support your journey.

9. Why do you think the University of Salford is the best place to develop an 
academic career?

Our staff are central to our success, we encourage everyone to be part of the 
work we do and we welcome innovative thinkers and people who want a challenge. 
We are committed to staff development and we offer a wide variety of 
development opportunities from in-house courses to funding for conference 
participation. And of course, they get to work with some of the best people, 
with the brightest minds and great senses of humours around the education world.

Current vacancies

We would love to hear from you and discover what your experience can offer us. 
We want you to be to self-motivated, student focused and be willing to join us 
and provide some of the best education in the UK. If you are interested in 
working for the School of Nursing, Midwifery, Social Work & Social Sciences at 
the University of Salford please contact Jennie Bacchus on 0161 295 5777 or see 
ourjob vacancies here. 
<https://jobs.theguardian.com/employer/210504/university-of-salford/>


Follow Brian on Twitter <https://twitter.com/bboag> or follow the school using 
@careatsalford. <https://twitter.com/careatsalford> 
