
When my father arrives in the hospice, there is a flurry of activity. Drug 
charts are checked, vital signs are tested. We all know he has come here to 
die, but still the idea is that something might be fixed, at least temporarily, 
and the young doctor and nurses on duty that evening have an air of “sorting 
things out”. It is a relief to get here; they know what to do. The flat has 
become a claustrophobic, smelly and unmanageable place for my mother to care 
for Dad.

The next day, you slide into the room like an elegant cat – without 
an entourage of junior doctors, a computer on wheels or a stethoscope slung 
around your neck. You lean over my sleeping father and take him in without 
saying anything, and then turn to my mother with a smile that is at once kind 
and serious.

You take us to a side room and tell us that he is nearly finished with his 
body now, that it is normal and natural and that there is nothing to be done 
except to keep him comfortable. You say it clearly and calmly, making eye 
contact with my mother. It is a beautiful day, and you suggest we take a walk 
and look at the sky, the daffodils, the trees beginning to bud. “He will be 
with you in these things,” you say, entirely without sentimentality. “It is 
time to let him go.”

You never adopt the drippy, concerned tone often used by professionals with 
the ill or grieving

For the first time in the entire period of my father’s cancer, my mother 
cries. Woman to woman, you look at her and she feels your genuine solidarity. 
It is a turning point, and from then on my mother prepares to cut free from her 
husband of more than 55 years.

Over the next days, when on duty, you appear quietly in the room with an aura 
of respect for the sacred space we have created with flowers, cards and 
drawings by grandchildren. You never talk loudly to my father as if he is deaf 
or stupid. You also never adopt the drippy, concerned tone often used by 
professionals with the ill or grieving. Your gaze is clear and direct, as is 
the information you give us. Dad is taking his time, he has things to say and 
his body is not quite ready to close down.

“This is not a medical condition we can treat, or something I can help with 
drugs or charts,” you say, as I pack away my violin after playing the Scottish 
folk tunes of Dad’s childhood to him. “This,” she gestures to my son sitting on 
the bed, the guitar lying on the chair, Mum holding Dad’s hand. “This is all 
that’s important now.”

There is nothing to do but wait, and I see from your experience and wisdom 
that you know how hard this is – this endless waiting, which is pregnant with 
ambivalence. You have seen this many times before.

Thank you for what Cicely Saunders 
<http://www.stchristophers.org.uk/about/damecicelysaunders> (the founder of the 
modern palliative care movement) called the “depth of time” you have given to 
us. Perhaps you spent no more minutes with my dad than any of the other 
professionals. Perhaps you even spent less time, as you didn’t bother much with 
symptoms or drugs and interventions that we could all see were pointless. But 
you met my dying father, my mother and me with honesty, dignity and sincerity, 
and this is what we will remember and treasure.

Anonymous

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Email family@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:family@guardian.co.uk> or write to Family Life, The Guardian, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include your address and phone number
