
The flat-sharing site SpareRoom.com has revealed 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/middle-aged-forced-into-flat-shares-ggz0mbz53>
 it has 100,000 clients in their late 40s and early 50s on its books, and 
35,000 customers in their late 50s and early 60s. I was not surprised to learn 
that older tenants are rising in number: many older house-hunters might be 
unable to get a mortgage due to their age, with renting the only option.

I always imagined I would own a home, spending my middle years at garden 
centres perusing water features, but I am a middle-aged tenant. Over the past 
few years, I have spent time sharing a home with people in their 20s, usually 
as a temporary measure, with all of us “between homes” and grateful for a place 
to stay.

A few years ago, my landlord went bankrupt and I was glad to share a house 
with a friend for a few months. Ryan, who was in his 20s, and I were at 
opposing ends of the domestic hygiene spectrum. He had never learned how to 
clean, while I had lived in my own place for years, developing my own 
standards. It was always going to result in a clash, but we worked it out and 
he is still one of my best friends.

A few years later, I shared with a contemporary from art school who had a 
spare room (I had just finished my master’s as a mature student). While we were 
housemates, I enjoyed listening to Bruno’s practice sessions (he’s a musician 
as well as an artist), and we shared the occasional meal. Admittedly, 
cleanliness issues occurred: Bruno was baffled by the concept of washing-up, so 
I took the view that washing a few more plates was hardly onerous. We swapped 
music and Bruno loaned me books.

 My most recent flat-sharing experience was not so easy. Another art-school 
contemporary, a friend of a friend, was having difficulty finding a flatmate, 
which I thought odd, given that the house was quite nice, but I was pleased to 
find a home. She was also in her 20, and had mental health issues. Her 
behaviour could be complicated (she often became fixated on how much I ate) 
and, perhaps because of her relative youth, invited her mother to stay at least 
once a month.

But overall, my experience of flat-sharing with younger people has been a 
positive one. As a former music journalist, I enjoy contemporary music, and I 
suspect that this might help when sharing with tenants of a different 
generation.

My twentysomething flatmates have generally been mature and personable, not 
hellraisers – and I have always been accepted, not treated as a mother figure, 
much to my relief. In return, I do not view my younger flatmates as children; 
indeed, I often asked Bruno to turn the music up, not down.

 * This article was amended on 21 June 2016. The picture on an earlier version 
was captioned as the Channel 4 show Cucumber; it is actually the Channel 4 show 
Crashing. 