
I eat the best creme caramel of my life in 26C heat, with life-sized cutouts 
of the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge smiling down at me from the dining room's 
slightly slanting balcony. A pigeon snoozes on the lone chandelier, dusty 
beneath peeling turquoise paintwork, and ceiling fans whirr above crowded, 
chattering tables. I'm sitting inBritannia and Co Restaurant (Wakefield House, 
11 Sprott Road), one of the last remaining Parsi cafes in south Mumbai (or 
south Bombay as the locals so protectively still call it), and I'm full of food.

Opened in the 19th-century by Parsi settlers – Zoroastrians from Iran – these 
cafes, with their magnificently faded, time-capsule dining rooms and speciality 
dishes, are a gloriously eccentric part of the fabric of Mumbai. They are also 
democratic and inclusive places, where people of all backgrounds, classes and 
sexes meet, so you may find a Sikh next to a Hindu or Zoroastrian or a group of 
young female students dining alone.

They are also a dying breed. In 1950 there were about 550 of them, many of 
which grew from humble tea stalls; now only 15 to 20 are still open.

"It's so sad there are so few left," says British restaurateur Kavi Thakrar, 
who – along with his cousin Shamil and chef Naved Nasir – has created London's
Dishoom restaurants <http://www.dishoom.com/> in the mould of these cafes. The 
three are acting as my guides on a food tour of Mumbai, and between them know 
this city's cuisine inside out: Naved because he lived and cooked here for four 
years, and the Thakrars because they've spent chunks of time here visiting 
their grandparents. Shamil was married here in 2006, in a special syndicated 
ceremony he shared with six couples from the city's slums.

Dishoom's food has been inspired by the varied cuisine of this city – stories 
from its Parsi cafes have even been baked onto the restaurant's plates – and 
Shamil hopes to "transport a bit of this vintage Mumbai to London".

"Mumbai is a city of immigrants," he says through mouthfuls of the deep, 
almost cheesily creamy caramel and sips of fresh lime soda – a quenching 
mixture of lime juice, salt, sugar and fizzy water that's a must-order here. 
"It's a huge mix and the cafes are the greatest example of that."

On a wall, cultural tributes preside: a painting of Queen Elizabeth II next to 
a portrait of Mahatma Gandhi, both hanging beneath a gilt-framed picture of 
Zarathustra, the Zoroastrian prophet worshiped by the Parsis. This unlikely 
trio sums up the essence of the cafes: their legacy from the days of the Raj, 
their tolerance of all religions, and their Zoroastrian roots.

That the Britannia and Co resides in a corner site of the genteel Ballard 
Estate business district, in a grand, Renaissance-style building designed by 
Scottish architect George Wittet (famous for the city'sGateway To India monument
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gateway_of_India>) is no accident.

"Many of the cafes hold sought-after positions in prime real estate," says 
Shamil. "Hindus are superstitious about building on street corners, but the 
Parsis didn't mind. That's why they became such shared spaces and promoted 
tolerance."

But just as their prime positioning has ensured longevity, so it now threatens 
their future, since the children of the current proprietors – most of whom took 
over the cafes from their parents – are more interested in property prices than 
the 14-hour working days required to run them. It's unlikely, Kavi and Shamil 
tell me, that most of these cafes will exist long after the current owners pass 
on.
 Boman Kohinoor at Britannia & Co. Photograph: Ming Tang-Evan 
Britannia and Co is open for lunch only, 12-4pm every day except Sunday, and 
around us people are tucking into their chicken berry pulaos, this cafe's most 
famous dish (along with the creme caramel). It's a heavenly, sweet-sour 
confluence of fragrant pilau rice layered with moist chunks of chicken and a 
rich, spiced tomato sauce, topped with sourbarberries 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2005/jun/25/foodanddrink1>, crunchy 
cashews and sweet, sticky caramelised onions. It's a recipe that, while 
recreated across the world (Dishoom has its own version, with cranberries), is 
a secret fiercely guarded by 91-year-old proprietor Boman Kohinoor, whose wife 
brought it with her from Iran.

Kohinoor has a keen sense of humour. "Welcome back to the home of your 
ancestors. They've been here for 300 years and we've all been very happy," he 
says when we're introduced, before vanishing momentarily, only to reappear with 
armfuls of laminated photographs, including one of a famous Bollywood actor, 
which he holds up. "He's a rascal," he says with a waggling finger. "He never 
brings his wife – always other actresses."

He proudly shows us letters from diners including George Bush Senior, Dick 
Cheney <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dick_Cheney>, and the Pope; one even 
carries the official letterhead of Windsor Castle. "Please give your Queen my 
love," he says, "We are very short on space but we'd love to fit her in when 
she returns to the city."

Born in 1923, the year his father set up the cafe, Kohinoor has worked here 
for the past 75 years, since he was 16, and he remembers a very different 
Mumbai from the now rapidly Americanising city: "There used to be 11 million 
people, now there are about 18 million, and there is so much pollution. 
Everything has gone up in price. In 1982 the berry pulao was 40 rupees, now 
it's 400." Which, at around £5 is still quite a steal, I almost point out, 
before glimpsing a sign above our table that reads, "Please do not argue with 
the management."

In the days that follow, we probably get through gallons of creamy, 
unspiced Parsichai and sample the individual, freshly made food of several more 
cafes. Each cafe – apart from the touristyLeopold Cafe (near Electric House on 
Colaba Causeway,leopoldcafe.com <http://www.leopoldcafe.com/>), which still 
bears bullet holes from the 26/11 attacks, andCafé Mondegar (Metro House, 
5-A Shahid Bhagat Singh Road, Colaba) – is crumbling in its own special way, 
each tangibly Parsi, with Zarathustra overseeing proceedings.

At Yazdani bakery and cafe (Fountain Akbar Ally, Saint Thomas Cathedral), we 
taste Mumbai's bestbrun maska, hot toasted white buns slathered in melted 
butter with crunchy crusts that we dip into hot chai – the bread melting in the 
mouth like brioche. Yazdani is known for its baked goods, which it has been 
making since the early 1950s.

Owner Parvez Irani takes us into the bakery (which is usually strictly 
off-limits to females). It's a 24-hour operation where a dozen or so bakers 
live in the rafters above the wood-fired ovens they tend day and night.

Naved says: "It's difficult to choose a favourite cafe because each one is 
known for its own dishes." But he's particularly enamoured with the deeply 
savoury, pleasingly fattykheema pau (spiced minced lamb) at Radio (Building No 
10, near Crawford Market), the most dilapidated of the places we visit. It is 
known to hold favour among the city's gangsters, and eating on its worn, wooden 
tables, dwarfed by a cavernous, crumbling ceiling in the near darkness, you can 
sense that it could harbour a certain menace.

"This is the best kheema pau in Mumbai," declares Naved, scooping up the 
glistening meat with thin slices of red onion and the pau – the white fluffy 
bread buns found in all Parsi cafes. He has created his own version of this 
dish.

"They haven't put any tomato in this," he says. "It's rich with ghee, garlic, 
ginger, coriander powder, chillies, peas and garam masala." From now on the 
kheema pau at Dishoom will besans tomatoes.

Kyani and Co (JSS Road, Dhobi Talao, Kalbadevi) is a more convivial set-up, 
with prettily engraved dark-wood panelling, dappled mirrors, Scandinavian 
bentwood chairs and chipped mosaic flooring. As well as its confectionary and 
baked goods – almond sponges, wine-flavoured biscuits and decorative cakes – 
this place is known for its breakfasts, and has a long, rambling egg repertoire 
that includespaneer bhurjee (stir-fried eggs), mutton scrambled eggs, and the 
repellent-sounding "half fry egg".

"There's a tradition of bodybuilding in Parsi culture," says Kavi, "hence all 
the eggs." Sure enough, on the far wall are some sepia photos of triumphantly 
muscular Iranians. Amid students and locals we hoover up plates of theakuri, 
masala scrambled eggs, which are flecked with tomato, onion, turmeric, chilli 
and coriander, and dip our butter-soft brun maska into the chai.

Owner Farooq Shokri is the third generation of his family to run the cafe, 
taking over in 2000. He shows us a stained, concise menu from 1975 – pointing 
out how he's extended it to help cover the steeply rising rents – as well as a 
remarkable ink drawing of his father by the painter and film directorMF Husain 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M._F._Husain>: relics that, like the cafe itself, 
it would be tragic to lose.

"I'm the only one left," says Shokri. "I don't think about what happens after 
me. I just carry on."

• The trip was provided by Dishoom (dishoom.com <http://www.dishoom.com/>). 
British Airways (0844 493 0787,ba.com 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/flights-to-mumbai/public/en_gb>) flies 
from Heathrow to Mumbai from £499 return
