
Confidence was the backbone of my upbringing. I was an only child, so I was 
spoilt, loved and given an enormous amount of confidence by my parents. Neither 
were confident themselves: my mother was uneducated and felt inferior. She was 
determined that I would go to university. She’d say, “I want you to be able to 
talk to anybody about anything” – and I can.

There’s a strong melancholic streak in me. People tend to think I’m funny and 
fluffy, but I can switch on a sixpence from extreme happiness to utter despair. 
I’m aware that doesn’t make it easy for people sometimes.

My mother died of a stroke in 1974, and for a long time I blamed myself. She 
was utterly devastated when I told her I was a lesbian not long before. My 
parents couldn’t understand it – they were disgusted – but continued to love 
me. I just thought, “This is what I am, let’s get on with it.”

Arnold Schwarzenegger is a pig of a man. We worked together [on the blockbuster
End of Days <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0146675/>] in 1999, and although he 
was relatively professional with me – because he didn’t fancy me – he was 
awfully gropey with women he was interested in. He thought a lot of himself, 
but I wasn’t surprised: he was a bodybuilder from Austria who went on to became 
a worldwide star.

My partner and I have had a civil partnership, but the thought of referring to 
one another as “wife” makes me feel sick

I adore being Jewish but I’m not a believer in God. Jewish people dislike me 
intensely because I’m pro-Palestine. I just endeavour to do good and cross 
barriers, and I don’t feel sorry about that at all.

Lazy, imprecise thought is a bore. The prolific use of the word “like” is the 
most annoying example I can think of. It’s a sign of a sloppy mental process.

JK Rowling is a fabulous woman. And I just love the fact that the richest 
woman in Britain is a writer – what a brilliant state of affairs. But Harry 
Potter didn’t make me rich [Margolyes playedProfessor Pomona Sprout 
<http://harrypotter.wikia.com/wiki/Pomona_Sprout>]: I was pleasantly paid, and 
it was just extraordinary to be a part of something that will mean generations 
of children know who I am.

I can’t bear children. I support children’s charities, I just don’t want them 
around me. It’s not very admirable, but it’s the truth.

Marriage is for straight people. I’ve been with my partner Heather for 48 
years – although she lives in Holland and I live in England. We’ve had a civil 
partnership, but the thought of referring to one another as “wife” makes me 
feel sick. I don’t understand why gay people are so anxious to get married.

I should have lost weight when I was younger. I’m a fat woman and to be 75 and 
fat is just stupid. I feel very silly for not being able to do it. It’s one of 
my greatest regrets.

Miriam Margolyes voices Where Is Peter Rabbit? at the Old Laundry Theatre, 
Bowness-on-Windermere, 27 June-4 September (hop-skip-jump.com 
<http://www.hop-skip-jump.com/>)
