
In the second annual Super Entrepreneurs programme, which explores the role of 
entrepreneurship in blue chip organisations, the media and social media 
category emerges as the most entrepreneurial sector in the UK.


Of the 20 key consumer sectors analysed, only companies within the media 
category managed to secure, on average, a Super Entrepreneur rating of A – the 
top rating being AAA and lowest rating CCC – with all other categories showing 
an average rating for their constituents of BBB or lower.

This result follows a process, undertaken independently by The Centre for 
Brand Analysis on behalf of the MAA 
<http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/super-entrepreneurs/se-about>, that 
analysed 200 medium-large companies’ entrepreneurial outlook and output based 
on the findings of an expert panel of 23.

The media category is led by Facebook UK, one of only six businesses, among 
the 200 companies analysed, to secure an AA rating. Guardian News and Media, 
Virgin Media, and Twitter UK, all of which are effectively in the top 20 by 
combined entrepreneurial output and outlook score, follow the social media 
giant in the category rankings.

BBC and Sky also both secure AA ratings, placing them in the top 30 most 
entrepreneurial companies in the UK. No media company secures lower than a BBB 
rating, with News UK & Ireland in absolute terms the lowest rated within the 
sector but still well with the top 50% of companies analysed.

The relative consistency of the companies in the category explains why the 
sector outperforms all others. Media companies, however, do not actually top 
the table for either entrepreneurial output or outlook, although in 
“Entrepreneurial Outlook” Facebook UK places fourth and for “Entrepreneurial 
Output” it ranks fifth – leading the media category in both areas.

Our second most entrepreneurial category is the Information and Search sector, 
led by Google UK, also one of the six companies to secure an AA rating. 
“Technology General” is the third most entrepreneurial category, led by Apple 
Computer UK, another AA rated business. Conversely, the Oil and Gas, Utilities 
and Household Goods categories are the worst performing sectors

Explaining the findings, panellists say that factors such as media company 
capacity for innovation are hallmarks of their entrepreneurialism. Andy Rubin, 
the chairman of Pentland Brands, says: “In an increasingly global, digital, 
mobile world entrepreneurship is more important than ever. Risk taking and 
innovation are essential to stay relevant and keep ahead of the disruptors.

And the clear skillset and entrepreneurial outlook of the leadership of media 
and tech companies also plays an important role. Karen Bill, the chair and 
director ofEnterprise Educators UK <http://www.enterprise.ac.uk/>, says: 
“Clearly many of these organisations have founders or CEOs with that strong 
technical expertise and knowledge which is pretty vital. Take Mark Zuckerberg 
as a computer programmer, Steve Jobs as the original disruptor of Apple, and so 
clearly those entrepreneurial skills are important.”

William Kendall, owner of Cawston Press and a past investor in both Covent 
Garden Soup Company and Green & Black’s, picks out the BBC for the quality it 
produces. He believes that this could be down to an outlook that is less 
short-term and profit-driven than many companies. He says: “It [the BBC] still 
turns out good products and believes in itself. It is not just run as far as I 
can see by a senior cabal who concentrate only on their short term in office 
and how to enrich themselves during it.”

Strong focus on innovation, clear and knowledgeable leadership and a 
razor-sharp focus on quality are all hallmarks of the entrepreneurial media 
culture that should inspire the wider business world and marketing experts in 
particular.

Tim Bourne is chairman of the MAA/joint chair of SuperEntrepreneur and joint 
CEO ofExposure <http://europe.exposure.net/>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
