
Which is more important, teaching or learning? If you saw a fellow teacher out 
buying fruit in the market with a sixth-form student, what would you do? How 
might the current political climate affect your teaching?

When we asked readers what questions they'd been asked at job interviews, the 
responses we received were testament to the variety of skills and 
responsibilities that teachers have. From providing pastoral care to 
pedagogical expertise, working in a school is tough – and so too is the 
interview process.

To help you prepare, we've surveyed readers and headteachers to find out what 
questions crop up during the recruitment process. You canbrowse our reader 
submissions by clicking here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/jan/29/teacher-job-interview-questions-readers-tips>
, or read our headteachers' tips below:

If I walked into your classroom during an outstanding lesson, what would I see 
and hear?

"I'd like to hear about: animated discussions, students clearly making 
progress as evidenced in oral and written contributions. High quality visual 
displays of students' work showing progress. High levels of engagement. 
Behaviour that supports learning."

Helen Anthony, headteacher, Fortismere school 
<http://www.fortismere.haringey.sch.uk/page/default.asp?title=Home&pid=1>

"After hearing a candidate's response I try to get them to talk about their 
experiences in the classroom. I try to get a sense of the impact that they have 
had on pupils' achievement."

Tim Browse, headteacher, Hillcrest primary school 
<http://www.hillcrest.bristol.sch.uk/site>

• Why do we teach x in schools?

"This question really throws people. If it is maths or English they sometimes 
look back at you as if you are mad. They assume it is obvious – a very 
dangerous assumption – and then completely fail to justify the subject's 
existence.

"Whatever the subject, I expect to hear things like: to improve skills and 
independent learning; to encourage team work; to gain a qualification; for 
enjoyment (very important, rarely mentioned); to enhance other subjects; to 
develop literacy, numeracy and ICT skills; to improve career prospects; self 
discipline; memory development; to encourage life-long learning in that 
subject. The list goes on…"

John Kendall, headteacher, Risca community comprehensive school 
<http://learn.caerphilly.org.uk/riscacomprehensive/>

• Can you tell me about a successful behaviour management strategy you have 
used in the past that helped engage a pupil or group of pupils?

"This allows candidates to give a theoretical answer – one that anyone who 
swotted up could give you – balanced with a personal reflection that shows how 
effective they are."

Tim Browse, headteacher, Hillcrest primary school

• If you overheard some colleagues talking about you, what would they say?

"This is one of my favourite questions (it's based on a question my National 
Professional Qualification for Headship (NPQH) coach used to ask me) because it 
gets candidates to think about their contribution to the school organisation 
and their team spirit. If I'm interviewing for a senior leader I would follow 
this up with: what would you want them to say about you in three years time? 
This way I can get a sense of where they want to develop as leaders."

Tim Browse, headteacher, Hillcrest primary school 

• Why do you want to work in special education?

"We're looking to see that the person genuinely recognises that we're in the 
business of education as opposed to simply caring for the children 
(surprisingly, some applicants don't really see it that way)."

Sean O'Sullivan, headteacher, Frank Wise school 
<http://www.frankwise.oxon.sch.uk/>

• Why do you want to work in this school?

"We want to see clear indications that candidates have done background work 
about our school and can talk about why the way we work appeals to them. We'd 
always want candidates to have visited the school so they should be able to 
flesh this out with specific examples of what they thought based on their 
visit."

Sean O'Sullivan, headteacher, Frank Wise school

• A question that is specific to the candidate's letter of application

"A candidate may have made a grand statement in their letter, but not gone 
into details about 'how' or the impact it had."

Tim Browse, headteacher, Hillcrest primary school 

• What are the key qualities and skills that students look for in teachers?

"Liking young people. Fairness. Consistency. Sense of humour. Passion for 
their subject. Good at explaining new concepts/ideas. Able to make the topic or 
subject relevant. Able to make everyone feel comfortable and confident about 
contributing."

Helen Anthony, headteacher, Fortismere school

• Evaluate your lesson 

"Teaching a one-off lesson in an unfamiliar school with students you have 
never met before is a difficult task, but a useful one for candidates and those 
making the appointment. The evaluation of the lesson by the candidate is 
crucial. I need to see someone who can be self-critical but who also recognises 
when things go well. Someone who makes suggestions as to how the lesson may 
have gone better, what they would do differently with hindsight. I like to hear 
them talk of the individual student's progress in the lesson, and how they 
would follow it up. Remembering pupils' names is always impressive. I'd rather 
see an ambitious lesson that goes a bit awry than a safe boring one."

John Kendall, headteacher, Risca community comprehensive school

• If we decided not to appoint you, what would we be missing out on?

"This is great as it enables candidates to sell themselves and really tell us 
what they are about."

Brett Dye, headteacher, Parc Eglos school 
<http://www.parc-eglos.cornwall.sch.uk/>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next role? 
Take a look atGuardian jobs for schools 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/schools?INTCMP=dis_1337> for thousands of the 
latest teaching, leadership and support jobs.
