
Every year, hundreds of amateur journalists enter the Guardian International 
Development Journalism competition 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/international-development-journalism-competition>
. Many of them have a pressing desire to become journalists specialising in 
this field, but for others that isn't the case. They have told us their burning 
passion is primarily global development. They want to find out more about the 
issues and get that information out to as many people as possible.

It is this ability to inspire writers, and the possibility of publicising 
important issues and projects, that has attracted the major sponsors behind 
this competition.

"This is the fourth year that Marie Stopes International [MSI] has supported 
the International Development Journalism Competition," says Michael Tirrell, 
communications manager, media and public affairs, at MSI. "We do it because it 
is key to improving awareness, commitment and support for international efforts 
to reduce poverty and promote development by motivating new and existing 
journalists to bring international development stories to life."

Bob Diamond, chief executive of Barclays, says: "We support the competition 
because it helps journalists to raise awareness of global development issues 
and the work being undertaken to tackle them."

The three major sponsors – MSI, Barclays and GlaxoSmithKline – support 
projects that aim to give direct help to various forms of development. MSI, for 
instance, works in 40 countries around the world.

"We build partnerships with both governments and non-state providers so that 
underserved women and men in rural areas and urban slums have a greater choice 
when it comes to family planning and their sexual and reproductive health," 
says Tirrell. "Through our work, Marie Stopes International prevents 
unnecessary deaths and makes a sustainable impact on the lives of millions of 
people every year."

Working in a rather different context, Barclays is committed to supporting 
international development projects in some of the most disadvantaged 
communities. "We believe that banks can play a critical role in fostering the 
job creation and sustainable economic growth which underpins strong 
communities," says Diamond. "In partnership with experienced non-governmental 
organisations, Barclays uses its experience to help deliver development 
programmes that enable people to gain the skills they need to get a job, run 
their own small business, and manage their money and savings in the most 
effective way."

Improving access to medicines

GSK is involved in improving the health of people in both the developed and 
developing world. The chief executive of GSK, Andrew Witty, says: "Developing 
countries bear a disproportionate share of the burden of disease yet people in 
these countries often have poor access to healthcare. GSK is fully committed to 
playing its part in tackling diseases that affect the world's poorest countries 
by investing in the development of new medicines and vaccines and taking steps 
to increase access to existing treatments."

Only four years remain until 2015 when the Millennium Development Goals – 
drawn up by world leaders in 2000 to tackle global poverty – should be met. 
Some of these goals in some of the countries involved are well on track. Others 
will fall short of the mark. And even after 2015, sadly, world poverty will not 
be over. There will be plenty more work to do.

So what else (other than entering the competition) should someone who is 
interested in the issues of global development do? Tirrell advises: "Follow the 
work of the range of amazing NGOs who work to improve the lives of people 
around the world." He also believes people "should be sure to highlight the 
importance of international development to their local members of parliament 
and the European Parliament".

Witty adds: "We can't just sit back in a comfortable environment and say we 
have done enough. We are making progress, but that will only continue if we are 
and remain restless about what more we can achieve."

So what of those working in development themselves? They are specifically 
honoured in the Guardian International Development Achievement Awards, which 
celebrate outstanding contributions to global poverty alleviation. This year, 
the award has gone to Renwick Rose, co-ordinator and chief executive of the 
Windward Islands Farmers Association, for his work on developing the Fairtrade 
banana business in the Windward Islands of the Caribbean.

To find out more, go to theguardian.com/achievementsaward  
<http://www.theguardian.com/achievementsaward>
