
"It's my birthday," said Michael, introducing himself. "I'm 44." And then he 
went off to turn the curds that were lying just beneath the surface of the 
primrose-coloured whey sitting placidly in a stainless steel vat in the 
creamery at the Loch Arthur Community.

I first came across the community last year, at a tasting of mutton on Ben 
Weatherall's estate not far away in Irongray, Dumfriesshire. The Loch Arthur 
creamery had provided the cheeses on that memorable, sunlit day. Egged on by 
Barry Graham, founding father of the community and self-taught cheese-maker, I 
worked my way through the whole lot, from the mild-mannered, round Crannog to 
the flat, square Criffel, its combed, washed-rind skin covering a soft, rich, 
rollicking, golden interior.

"Work is central to what we do," says Rene Graham, Barry's wife. "We have a 
very rich cultural life here, but work - meaningful, productive work - is the 
key." The creamery grew out of the needs of one local resident with mobility 
problems - eight years ago, Barry and Rene were looking around for something 
that someone in a wheelchair could do, and hit on churning butter as the answer.

And butter-churning led to cheese-making, and cheese-making led to yogurt and 
cream cheese and ricotta. And these led to a shop stocked with Loch Arthur and 
other cheeses, not to mention Loch Arthur breads and Loch Arthur meats 
(Galloway beef, Border Blackface lamb and mutton), Loch Arthur marmalade, 
muesli and granola, and shelves stacked with all sorts of other goodies. It's a 
cross between an ethical health shop, a smart deli and a mini-supermarket, 
complete with lavatory paper and washing-up liquid.

As well as the creamery and shop, there's a bakery and a herd of 170 cattle to 
take care of, not to mention pigs and sheep, vegetable growing, a weavery, a 
woodworking centre... And there's a chance the shop may lead to a bigger shop 
with a cafe - the Loch Arthur Community is currently wrestling with the human 
and financial implications of that possibility, though.

But then, they are no strangers to wrestling with problems. "We lost our 
entire herd of Ayrshire cattle and all our other animals, including our pet 
goat, during foot-and-mouth," says Rene. "We've had to build up again since 
that."

The original herd was replaced with one of Dairy Shorthorn crosses, which were 
more biddable than the frisky Ayrshires. As Rene points out, every activity in 
which the community gets involved has to be carefully moulded around the 
abilities of its members, and to take into account the demands of various 
bureaucratic departments - environmental health officers, social services and 
housing agencies, to name just three. There can't be many charitable 
enterprises that are subjected to such a host of supervising bodies. And yet, 
in spite of what would seem a mountain of daily challenges to many people, a 
sense of cheerful optimism pervades the community.

Birthday or not, back in the dairy Michael is still studiously stirring the 
curds and whey. They're a bit short-handed in the creamery this morning, you 
see. Usually there are 10 workers in total, six of them with disabilities who 
work a split shift: three in the morning and three in the afternoon. One of the 
permanent cheese-makers is off for the day, so Michael is having to do rather 
more than he might normally, but he's happy about that, all the same. "I am The 
Rock," he says.

Alongside him, Cristoph, his frizzy hair bundled up under a hat, scoops some 
of the curds and whey into plastic blue buckets. He came over from Germany for 
a six-month volunteer period - that was four years ago. Loch Arthur has that 
sort of effect on people.

Where to get it

Loch Arthur Community Beeswing, Dumfries , 01387 760296, locharthur.org.uk 
<http://www.locharthur.org.uk> 

Cheeses are also available by mail order from creamery@locharthur.org.uk
