
Sad to say, this is my last column for Weekend. Like John McCain and Barack 
Obama, I have to focus all my attention on the financial crisis. In my case, 
this involves filling my basement with apples that I'll soon be selling on the 
street. I also have to find one of those pairs of shoes where your toes stick 
out, and a hobo knapsack, and learn all the words to Brother, Can You Spare A 
Dime? and grow my beard into a kind of rugged stubble and practise hobbling 
around with my sign that says, "Will write for food".

Now is a kind of calm-before-the-storm moment here in America. We have the 
aforementioned financial crisis, we have two wars going on, we have a 
vice-presidential candidate who, in terms of how she talks, she just, what she 
does is, phrases are added, which what that means, in terms of her meaning? Is, 
what she does is, puts new ones on, or conjoining, in order so that she, when 
speaking, can glean closer into that thing, which, hopefully, she has been 
meaning?

So that's reassuring. It's been a long time since we were led by someone whose 
command of the language was, in terms of how good he is, or were, no, not so 
hot, basically ungood, when looking upon it.

But not to worry. America's fine. Although I have, these past two years, made 
a lot of fun of America, like the smart-mouthed kid in the back seat of the car 
making fun of his family. Of course he loves his family, of course he believes 
in his family: he is the product of that family; that family is all he knows. 
His criticism can be seen as a form of engagement, of intimacy, of love, even.

America is having an identity crisis. On one side: fear, aggression, banality, 
xenophobia. On the other: hopefulness, humour, confidence in human nature, 
critical thought. This battle is not being fought along party lines; it is not 
the case that one party or candidate holds a monopoly on these positive 
virtues. No: it is more existential and every one of us is fighting it 
internally. Which country are we to be? The terrified, torturing, isolated 
bully; or the tolerant, slow-to-anger, naive-but-bright protector-of-the-poor? 
It's not altogether a new battle: the American heart - hell, maybe the human 
heart - has been divided along these lines for a long time. But here, in our 
time, it feels like the battle is heating up. So, as they used to say on TV: 
stay tuned.

Finally, I want to say how much I've enjoyed writing this column these past 
two years, and how much I've appreciated your interest and support. It has been 
a great honour, and I'll never forget your collective national kindness. Thank 
you, England, and goodbye for now.
