
A few weeks ago, the "insurgents" in Iraq took their mindless violence to, as 
we say in our American reality shows, "a whole other level". They tricked (or 
forced) two women with Down's syndrome into suicide-bombing a pet bazaar.

Wow. That will be hard to beat. Maybe, for their next triumph, they could 
trick/force a couple of pregnant women with Down's syndrome into 
suicide-bombing a pet bazaar that sells only very cute pets that have just had 
life-saving surgery, and is subsidised by a kindergarten.

Brave jihadis! Your daring astounds me. Not just anyone can trick people 
incapable of understanding their actions into murdering a bunch of 
noncombatants/animals calmly minding their own business. Surely, this is why 
God created all these beings in the first place: so you and you alone could 
decide which ones to slaughter in His holy name. Onwards and upwards, guys! In 
the future, perhaps you should consider strapping a bomb to a cute bunny and 
sending it into a home for mentally challenged monks. Or direct a team of 
bomb-rigged and blindfolded puppies into a neonatal ward. Or trick 20 morally 
pure virgins who have never had an impure thought to blow up 20 other morally 
pure virgins who have also never had an unclean thought.

Truly, with this act, you have opened my eyes. Previously I mistook you for 
ego-driven, power-hungry fanatics, but I now see you for what you are: 
spiritual warriors, full of love for your fellow man and God, determined to do 
whatever is necessary to express this love, including massacring your fellow 
men and doing the opposite of what every world religion, including yours, tells 
us God wants from us.

Here's a thought: since you seem to believe in using the simple to destroy the 
innocent, and seem to understand yourself as both simple and innocent, why not 
stage a kind of Murderous Jihadi Super Bowl in a vast, open space, using 
yourselves (and yourselves alone) to blow all of yourselves up? What a great 
victory this destruction of you will be, for you, over us! Even though there 
will be none of you left, you will have taught us a lesson about how serious 
you are, and how inspired with Godliness. And you shall ascend to heaven and 
look God in His face, and He will get a chance to tell you how grateful He is 
that you took it upon yourselves to slaughter so many of his simple, innocent 
creatures in the name of your big ideas.

Or better yet, eschew violence, settle down, have a bunch of kids, get old and 
fat, gradually fading away, praying daily, increasing all the time in 
acceptance and understanding. Now, that's a daring spiritual path.
