
I sometimes feel like I’m the parent to more than 60 children. They get tired 
and grumpy, fall out with each other, need feeding and resting, praising and 
rewarding. They make me proud, they make me cross. I often wonder if they 
consider me to be a parent and, if so, what kind.

I’m the head of a primary school with supportive staff who work hard, and 
expect me to do the same. In many ways, I find that my staff are like my 
children, too. When things get tough, as the parent, I try to make sure the 
senior leadership team (SLT) takes the hardest hit. When the Department for 
Education doles out stress, we absorb as much as possible so our children 
suffer less.

We agonise over which hoops to jump through and which we can try to bypass. We 
carefully plan how to implement what is required with minimal collateral 
damage, and undertake as much of the legwork as possible – often at the expense 
of our own health and wellbeing. We don’t complain because we’re the ones who 
listen to the complaints, and whose performance is judged on staff morale, 
according to the governors’ latest staff survey.

Like any parent I try to shield my staff from the harsh realities of what 
we’re being asked to deliver

But even though I’ve never had a year out of the classroom, I’m still 
conscious that to some, as a member of the SLT, I will always be the “them” to 
their “us”. It upsets me to read about teachers who perceive SLTs as being in 
ivory towers, enjoying fat salaries or behaving like government pawns. At 
least, that’s how it is in my school.

I hear horror stories of draconian headteachers and schools run by teams of 
oppressive bullies who see themselves as the overlords of a crippling regime. I 
wonder whether these people really believe such approaches are effective or if 
they have been so brainwashed by those ruling over them, to the point where 
they can’t see an alternative?

I want teachers to know that we’re not all bad. Sometimes we hate ourselves 
for the position we feel forced into, and nothing means more to us than when 
our colleagues see this, and support us because, despite what some may believe, 
the SLT are humans too and it can be ever so lonely at the top.

I want them to know that when I was promoted to the SLT, my working week 
increased by at least 10 hours and my income went up by £42 a month. I want 
them to know I love my job and I love them, and like any parent I try to shield 
them from the harsh realities of what we’re being asked to deliver because I 
want them to thrive.

I don’t want them to know how much the budget has been cut by or to worry that 
their jobs are on the line. Or that I refused a pay rise and a much-needed PC 
upgrade to ensure curriculum budgets weren’t cut and they could still buy some 
of the luxuries that make their teaching a little more bearable in the current 
high-stakes environment. I want them to feel supported and empowered, and will 
willingly do whatever I can to try to achieve that.

But most of all, I want them to know that, at heart, the SLT are still 
teachers in a classroom. In fact, we were (and my team still is) really good at 
it. We don’t have all the solutions and often, even as the headteacher, I don’t 
have enough sway to make the decisions I would like to about how to run our 
school. But our passions are lessons and learning, and we secretly envy the 
amount of time class teachers get to spend doing just that with children.

Last week, I was conducting an appraisal review with one of my team, who I’ve 
nurtured from newly-qualified teacher to middle-management. As a good to 
outstanding classroom practitioner with a few years’ experience, he is 
beginning to take on more responsibility and aspires to a senior leadership 
role. We were discussing the path to his ambition when he mentioned he was 
looking forward to having the time and freedom to be more influential.

I did all I could not to snort and crush his dream. I saw myself, more than a 
decade ago, believing in a similar paradise. The reality is a bigger workload 
and a much starker awareness of the lack of freedom we actually have.

My greatest area of personal development has been learning how to create 
pockets of freedom within the requirements set elsewhere, and thinking about 
how to influence the direction of a one-way road I didn’t build. But I couldn’t 
find the words to express this – it’s a reality you can’t fully appreciate 
until you’re in it.

Instead, I said something about giving him some release time to explore 
different approaches. Then I mentally signed myself up for another morning of 
covering classes: my baby could spread his wings a little, and I could always 
work more the next weekend.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
