
This week, I conclude my investigative series on the evils of advertising.

One popular but deceptive advertising technique is 
positive-feelings-transference. Say you're trying to sell a stapler. Show a 
guy, holding one of your staplers, walking into a hotel room with nine adoring 
supermodels. The watcher thus gets the following message: using this stapler 
will make you attractive to supermodels.

Say you are trying to sell a car. Show a guy getting out of your competitor's 
car. He is struck by lightning and some lions trot over and feed on his 
still-spasming corpse. Then a guy pulls up in the car we're trying to sell. As 
he gets out, the lightning comes towards him but he uses his car keys to 
deflect it so that it hits the lions and tames them, and they come and lick his 
hand. Our ad thus communicates the following subtle, subliminal message: our 
car will make you impervious to all physicality and, verily, even immortal. 
Plus, the animals will really dig you.

Or say we're trying to sell an anti-haemorrhoid medication. Our ad might go 
like this: a guy sits uncomfortably in his office, shifting in his chair, 
moaning, wiping sweat from his brow, occasionally crying out in abject pain, 
passing out on the floor, lying there unconscious for two hours. Finally, he 
wakes up and leaps out of the window.

A few floors below sits another guy, also with haemorrhoids - but he has been 
taking "our" medication. He looks happy, not fidgety in the least, getting all 
kinds of work done, occasionally calling a friend or relative to say his rear 
area feels absolutely normal. Then he walks to the window - and here comes the 
first guy, falling fast.

The cured guy throws the falling guy a pill, the falling guy takes it, is 
cured and starts flying around in the clouds, looking back in awed wonder at 
his rear end. The other guy jumps out of his window and the two new friends fly 
all over the city, cruising for supermodels. A flock of supermodels joins them 
and they all fly to Paris, making love over the Atlantic in different 
groupings. The subliminal message? Supermodels who can fly prefer men who 
formerly had haemorrhoids.

My point is: advertisements are a big lie. I've been taking that haemorrhoid 
medication for four years, can't fly and have never had group sex with 
supermodels, flying or not. Plus, I have never been to Paris. Plus, I still 
have haemorrhoids. So I'm going to break free of the false seductiveness of 
that ad and live in the real world, getting my supermodels the old-fashioned 
way: by buying that stapler.
