
Two jurors have received suspended jail sentences for contempt of court.

James Smith, 28, who carried out internet research into the case he was trying 
atLiverpool <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> crown court in 2014, was 
given a nine-month term suspended for 12 months by the lord chief justice, Lord 
Thomas, and Mrs Justice Whipple at the high court in London.

Deborah Dean, who disclosed the contents of jury deliberations after her 
service at Sheffield crown court the same year, was jailed for three months, 
suspended for 12 months.


The proceedings were brought by the solicitor general, Robert Buckland, who 
told the court that Smith’s disclosure to other jurors of what he had found out 
about a defendant resulted in the 10-week firearms and drugs trial being 
abandoned at a cost of nearly £80,000.


Dean, 47, wrote three letters, which expressed derogatory views about her 
fellow jurors, to two defendants who had been jailed after a trial involving 
rape, trafficking for sexual exploitation and sexual activity with a child.


Buckland said later: “These are both serious examples of juror misconduct 
where the repeated directions of the judge were blatantly ignored. One of the 
cases cost the taxpayer huge amounts of money when the trial had to be 
abandoned. This wastage of costs was completely avoidable.

“Contempt of court of this nature involves serious wrongdoing and I instigated 
these proceedings as it was clearly in the wider public interest to do so. Any 
action which interferes with the administration of justice is a serious breach 
and I hope today’s judgment sends a lesson to other jurors about their 
responsibilities.”


Smith, who was ordered to pay £900 costs, said he had been “basically nosy” 
and apologised for his stupidity. His life had fallen apart and he had left his 
job on the railways to become a taxi driver, he said.

The judges heard that Dean had suffered a bleed to the brain some months 
before the trial and was afflicted with daily epileptic seizures for which she 
needed medication.

In her letters to Usman Ali, who was serving three years for sexual activity 
with a child, and Shakeal Rehman, who was sentenced to 12 years for trafficking 
and rape, she said she was sorry for the outcome and that she had tried to 
fight their corner in the jury room.

She apologised and said she was distressed and sent the letters out of 
misguided sympathy.


Thomas said that Smith and Dean, who accepted they were in contempt, had been 
seriously affected by the 18-month delay in bringing the matter to court.

He said that it was never an easy thing for a court to deal severely with 
those who were giving of their civic duty, but swift action against those who 
had broken the orders of the court had the effect of preserving trial by jury 
from interference.

He directed that there should be a comprehensive rewriting of the notices 
given to jurors into “plain English” by 1 October so the court was not faced 
again with people who contended they were not aware of the law.

This would mean that no one could be in any doubt as to the obligations 
imposed and the penal consequences that would follow if they were broken.

He said the exercise might cost a little money, but the expenditure would be 
small in relation to the £80,000 of public money which was lost.
