
Here’s why you should choose a nursing career through Cambian Group.

What’s your role in Cambian 
<https://jobs.theguardian.com/minisites/cambian-group/>

I’m the acting hospital manager for a women’s hospital in Derbyshire.

What’s the best bit about your job – what makes you want to get up in the 
morning?

Driving change, and improvement. Nursing is so varied and dynamic that you can 
make so much of an impact on people’s lives by thinking outside of the box. I 
think it’s fair to say that mental health nurses recognise that in reality the 
box doesn’t exist!

What’s your biggest challenges?

Keeping everyone happy. I have a duty of care to my patients, my staff, my 
profession, and the service. I spend a lot of time spinning plates and greasing 
wheels just so things happen as they are supposed to.

What made you decide to work for Cambian?

The quality of care management and delivery. We are passionate about 
healthcare being delivered in the right way, and providing a truly outstanding 
service.

What are the roles you’re now looking to fill?

Currently my site is fully staffed, which is no mean feat these days in 
healthcare. However, as the demand for our services increases so too does our 
need for excellent mental health and learning disability nurses.

What are the biggest challenges in these roles?

One of my favourite sayings about nursing is that it is an effective and 
affective role, meaning it is great that we get to help people, however, we are 
also at risk of being affected. I think this level of complexity highlights the 
challenging and rewarding aspect of nursing and my job.

Why should nurses leave the NHS to come and work at Cambian?

The NHS does some great work, and employs some excellent nurses, however many 
nurses I speak to in the NHS feel they are not given the freedom or resources 
to be the kind of nurse they want to be. Cambian offers great work 
environments, and really values nursing as an art and a science in which the 
profession can flourish. Nurses in Cambian develop and progress in their 
careers in ways the NHS cannot match.

What type of people are you looking for?

Passionate, positive, and open-minded. We want train drivers, not just 
passengers.

What do people need to know about working for Cambian?

It’s fast-paced, challenging, and rewarding. It’s about working with people 
the right way and helping people rebuild their lives in their own vision.

Where can people get more information?

Through the Cambian minisite 
<https://jobs.theguardian.com/minisites/cambian-group/> or contact your local 
hospital manager.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Cambian Group
