
At 4.30 in the morning, I woke with a tongue bigger than my mouth. I couldn’t 
swallow anything, not even water. But I could breathe, and the last time 
something like this happened, it went away by itself. So, although I felt as if 
I were swallowing a pillow, I decided not to bother anybody until a decent hour.

By 7.30, it felt as if I were swallowing two pillows and a duvet, so I phoned 
my daughter, who lives next door. “Dough neeb do banigh,” I explained, “bud I 
migh neeb do go do hothbidal.” She helped me pack a shoulder-bag in case I 
needed to stay in.

At the Addenbrooke’s <> A&E unit, I was glad to have her with me as 
a translator when I told the doctors on duty that one of the drugs in my bag 
was vital and that I hadn’t been able to take my morning dose yet. Try saying 
that with two pillows and a duvet in your mouth, plus a soft sofa. But 
eventually the intravenous drugs worked my tongue loose, and after about nine 
hours we were going back the other way. The whole family, including my 
granddaughter’s dog, was waiting at home to tell me in turn that if it happened 
again, I should yell for help straight off.

The next day I spent resting up for, guess what, a trip to Addenbrooke’s, 
where I was due to be examined by the dermatologists prior to the removal of a 
carcinoma that was starting to look likethat creature in the first Alien movie 
that suddenly erupts from John Hurt’s chest 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsD6AL3HJtM>. Like many Australians my age, I 
am prone to this kind of trouble: when we were kids in quest of a tan, we would 
lie around forever being cooked by ultra-violet rays, and the results show up 
around now in the form of skin cancers.

Related: Clive James: ‘It is not yet against the law to be frivolous…’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/21/clive-james-climate-blindness-loretta-lynch-attorney-general-fossil-fuels>

Fondly, I thought that after this examination, the actual operation would be 
at least a fortnight in the future, but no: owing to extreme good luck – this 
was emphasised in unison by two doctors and a nurse – there was a slot open 
right now.

So there I was, lying flat again for the second time in three days. But this 
time there was a lot more happening. With the aid of liquid nitrogen, an 
uncannily effective local anaesthetic and a whole bunch of weirdly humming 
electronic tools, they cut out not only the principal alien but two satellites, 
one in each shoulder. With three sets of stitches, I was soon on my way home 
again, arriving in time to watch Andy Murray, after a couple of days of acute 
discomfort,finally nail Radek Stepanek in the French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/24/andy-murray-fights-back-stepanek-french-open>
. Stepanek, who is half my age, was referred to as the wily veteran.
