
The financial rewards of a degree from an elite university are revealed today 
in a report which estimates that an Oxbridge graduate will earn an average 
£10,000 more every year of their lives than a graduate of a non-Russell Group 
university.

According to the report by the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/levels-of-success/>, graduates from 
Oxford and Cambridge will over their lifetimes earn on average £46,000 
annually, compared with £41,000 earned by otherRussell Group 
<http://www.russellgroup.ac.uk/about/our-universities/> graduates, and just 
under £36,000 by graduates from other universities.

In stark contrast, those whose education ends after A-level will earn an 
average salary of £23,000 over their lifetime, and those with no qualifications 
will earn less than £16,000.

The report, which aims to improve social mobility through education, focuses 
on apprenticeships in the UK and their earning potential, compared with 
university graduates. It finds that over a lifetime the best apprentices will 
earn £50,000 more than many graduates.

The report, called Levels of Success: the potential of UK apprenticeships, 
says that apprentices with a level 5 qualification will earn on average over a 
lifetime £1.43m compared with the £1.38m that graduates of non-Russell Group 
universities will earn. A Russell Group graduate can expect lifetime earnings 
of £1.6m, and Oxbridge graduates £1.8m.

The new calculations, by the Boston Consulting Group, factor in the cost of 
going to university, including average student debt levels, compared with the 
ability of apprentices to earn while learning.

Though the earning potential for the best apprentices is competitive, 
currently the 60% of apprenticeships are at level 2, which is GCSE standard and 
does not attract higher salaries. Thegovernment plans to create three million 
apprenticeships by 2020 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/20/3m-apprenticeships-david-cameron-welfare-cuts>
, but there are fears that many will only be at level 2.


Sir Peter Lampl, the chairman of the Sutton Trust, said: “Today’s report shows 
that the best apprenticeships offer similar financial security as an 
undergraduate degree.


“Although the government’s target for apprenticeships to 2020 is 3m, we’ve 
only had 30,000 higher apprenticeships in the last two years. We need more good 
apprenticeships to offer genuine alternatives to A-levels and degrees.

“We also need to tackle the ingrained negative culture of apprenticeships that 
exists amongst teachers, parents and young people alike.”

The university thinktank million+ challenged the Sutton Trust findings and 
said the premium applied to a very small group of level 5 apprenticeships and 
was in part accounted for by their earlier entry into the labour market.


Pam Tatlow, the chief executive of million+, said: “Lifetime earnings are 
affected by a range of factors, not least social background and some students 
enter university with many more advantages than others.

 “Britain needs a highly skilled workforce but it is wrong to cherrypick a 
very small group of apprentices and compare their earnings with those of the 
majority of graduates.

 “The reported advantage in earnings of this small number of level-5 
apprentices is partly a product of the head start provided by them beginning to 
earn earlier in their careers.”

Kirstie Donnelly, the managing director of City & Guilds, 
<http://www.cityandguilds.com/> welcomed the findings and said society had 
misled the younger generation to assume that higher education was always the 
best option.

“Yet figures for graduate salaries are skewed by the very high earnings in 
certain occupations – the truth is that apprenticeships can also be a 
financially and personally rewarding choice.”
