
The lane to Stolford is narrow and windy, and hemmed in by lacy cow parsley. 
The cluster of houses that makes up Stolford is right at the end, just before 
the tarmac peters out into the khaki brown of the Bristol Channel. Through the 
salt-haze, you can just make out the Vale of Glamorgan on the other side. 
Around Stolford stretch the flats of Sedgemoor, fields trimmed with alder, ash 
and hazel. Pylons clump off into the distance.

Beyond the rim of smooth stones that make up the beach is mud. As my brother, 
Tom, wrote in The Book Of Eels, "Mud is in the ascendant, a sticky, glistening, 
quaking grey expanse, streaked with lines of greasy, soapy rocks. It is a world 
of its own, requiring special techniques from its residents and visitors. The 
wading birds do nicely, and so does Brendan on his mudhorse."

At that time, it was said that Brendan Sellick was the last of the mudhorse 
fishermen, but that has turned out not to be true. "I've done it since I was a 
kid," he says. "I went out with my father. He did it all his working life, as 
did his father. And the one before. My son, Adrian, he's doing it now. I help 
him out." Brendan, now in his 70s, tanned and sharp-eyed, may have given up the 
rather uncertain business of being a mudhorse fisherman, but Adrian, in turn, 
is passing on the skills and wisdom to his own children.

True, a mudhorse may seem more remarkable than romantic. It's a cross between 
a barrow and a sledge, with a flat wooden base and a flat projecting prow. On 
the base are four upright poles, joined up by further pieces of wood to form a 
kind of cage. The wooden elements are dovetailed to each other, so there's no 
metal to corrode. At low tide the mudhorse is loaded with buckets and nets, and 
the fisherman dons his waders and pushes it out across the mud. "You lie on the 
back, on your belly," Brendan says, "and push with your feet."

And that's how Adrian propels the mudhorse out two miles to where nets are set 
at strategic points in the Channel. He collects the catch from the nets, loads 
it into the buckets, replaces any damaged nets and then pushes the mudhorse 
back to land. It sounds disarmingly simple. And it is, but it requires an 
encyclopedic knowledge of the flats and of the ways of fish. It requires 
fitness and strength, as well as nerve and stamina to run the gauntlet of the 
tide. "I've nearly been caught a few times," Adrian says."You know, getting cut 
off by the tide. It's being greedy, trying for one more fish in the next net 
when you know you shouldn't."

What he gets depends on the time of year. Today, there's a decent display of 
grey mullet, a couple of plaice, a tiny dogfish, a cuttlefish, some skate. 
Later on in the summer it'll be shrimp, prawns and sea bass. Sole and plaice, 
too. Come winter, there will be sprats, cod and whiting. Brendan and Adrian 
sell what they catch from a shack beside the road made from the same rounded 
stones you see on the beach. It's marked by a sign that reads "Fresh Fish 
Prawns Shrimps".

Once, there were dozens of mudhorse fishermen round these parts, but time and 
tide have accounted for all but the Sellicks. There aren't the fishmongers any 
more - or the fish, either. Brendan thinks this may have something to do with 
the effect that Hinkley Point power station, just along the coast, may have on 
marine life, killing off the small fish and tiny creatures at the bottom of the 
food chain when it draws them in along with the water needed to cool the plant. 
He is excited to see his suspicions confirmed by a recent article on research 
into the very same problem.

Still, there's enough for him, and Adrian, to make a living. And, hopefully, 
there'll be enough for Adrian's sons to do so, too.
