
The dilemma My girlfriend and I decided we would travel the world together for 
a year. The problem is that I’m having second thoughts about whether to go with 
her. Bearing in mind that we are both 25 years old and have been seeing each 
other exclusively for 10 years, I feel there may be more to experience going 
separately than together. Do you think I should bury this scepticism and go 
ahead with plans knowing that this may reveal future resentment in our 
relationship, or do we go our separate ways in hopes of living our desired 
futures?

Mariella replies I need help on this “desired future”. If your girlfriend 
isn’t part of it, then it’s better to let her go now rather than after an 
altercation on a highway in the Australian outback.

You’ve certainly both given your partnership a good shot. The ambition of 
dating the same person from your mid-teens and then settling down, while a 
common expectation in my lifetime, feels like it comes from centuries ago. It’s 
not just a conundrum for you but for all of us. Ten years is as long a 
relationship as many adults manage, and you two have been together since your 
school days, which is impressive and unusual.

Bear in mind the long lives you are likely to be living. You could end up 
celebrating 80 years of devotion!

The greatest seismic shift in society seems to be not how much longer we’re 
living but how much slower we’re maturing. Moving out of home, let alone 
settling down to being a twosome before you’ve hit your 30s, is increasingly 
unusual. Just look at you two, off on your gap year seven years into your 
voting adult lives. Fifty years ago, if a woman wasn’t married by 22, words 
like spinster (and feminist) were bandied about. Nowadays what’s the hurry? We 
live much longer than we did when the institution of marriage, still our 
favoured way of pairing up and shorthand for future-building together, was 
invented. Fifteen years feels like an achievable goal when it comes to sharing 
a bedroom and bathroom for all but the most mismatched couples, but beyond that 
the odds of survival are much reduced. With expected lifespans now hitting nine 
decades and beyond,settling on one person 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/have-sex-same-person-rest-life-keep-exciting-bedroom-work>
 and promising to honour and cherish them, potentially for seven decades, is 
quite a tall order.

I’m relieved I didn’t meet my husband until I was nearly 40, reducing that 
daunting time span to a slightly more manageable duration, particularly when 
combined with potential health hazards resulting from my misspent youth! 
Whereas once, third and fourth marriages suggested a flighty approach to 
commitment, it’s now perfectly reasonable to encompass a cluster of long 
relationships into an interminably long life. In fact, I can’t help wondering 
if all relationships desiring that official stamp of approval should be 
certified on a 10-year renewable basis with an extended warranty available on 
request. A wedding day and all of the promises made stays fresh in the mind for 
only a few years. After that, with nothing to look forward to but more of the 
same, a renewal of vows seems a sensible and salutary reaffirmation. You don’t 
need to worry about any of that yet, but you do need to bear in mind the 
hitherto unimaginably long lives you are likely to be living. If you did decide 
to stick with this girl, you could end up celebrating 80 years of devotion. For 
that to sound like less of a threat you need to be expressing more certainty 
about the union than you do presently.

Not that I’m unmoved by the potential of extremely young love evolving into 
long-term unions. There are few sights more likely to move me to tears than 
octogenarians holding hands. Not just to see the gnarly fingers knotted 
together, but also to imagine the many storms they’ve weathered during their 
years in unison. You might wonder where I’ve drifted off to here. Being old and 
alone has far fewer merits than being young, free and single, so keeping an eye 
on where you want to end up is as important as choosing the route you take to 
get there. It’s not that you can’t enjoy yourself in advancing years, but 
companionship at a time when our social lives inevitably dwindle seems to keep 
us healthier and happier. So if there is a chance of you two reaching those 
twilight years together, it’s worth pursuing.

Travelling together will certainly test your strengths and weaknesses, but 
with fissures already in the cement binding you together it may, as you fear, 
turn them into cracks. Your choices are simple to outline and harder to choose: 
stay together and use this upcoming adventure as a great bonding experience; 
travel together and see if you last the course; take a sabbatical from each 
other and hope that absence drives you back into each other’s arms with 
increased relish; or split up now, on the basis that you are not ready to make 
further commitments until you’ve seen what the world holds for you.

I can’t make the decision for you, and I have no idea how strong or otherwise 
your relationship is. I do know that if you consider what I’ve said and are 
honest with yourself and your girlfriend, you’ll come to the right conclusion. 
If you travel, fettered or unfettered, you’ll come back the better for seeing 
beyond your present horizons. For any relationship to last the course there 
needs to be evolution, space to grow and room for individual experience. How 
you carve that out is up to you.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
