
I was a massive Bob Monkhouse fan when I was growing up. I used to go and sit 
in the audience of various TV shows. One of them wasOpportunity Knocks, so I 
got to see the way Monkhouse worked close up. Some people only saw this 
slightly smarmy, American-style game-show host, but when you saw him performing 
live you realised that there was this whole other dimension to him. I didn’t 
know that much about stand-up comedy then, but I was mesmerised.

Bob trained in the men’s clubs and holiday camps. In those days the TV scouts 
would find a talent and then look for a vehicle – like a quiz show – that would 
let them show their ability, but also have longevity. Bob was brilliant at 
working the audience and he was always ready for any eventuality. If there was 
ever a gap in filming he’d be off straightaway, doing his act. But I think his 
reputation probably suffered from him being on TV so much. Some people found 
him too slick, too American – but I think if you’re putting on a show you have 
a duty to be as professional as possible. If you asked most comics, even the 
new ones, the majority would still look up to Bob and think he was the daddy.

Suddenly I felt a tap on my shoulder. I turned around and a man said to me, 
'Hello, I’m Bob Monkhouse'

In 2002 I was backstage at the Hammersmith Apollo after the dress rehearsal 
for theRoyal Variety Show with these big performers like Shania Twain and Kylie 
Minogue. The comedians were all sharing a dressing room: Lee Mack, Omid 
Djalili, Jimmy Carr and me. Suddenly I felt a tap on my shoulder. I turned 
around and a man said to me: “Hello, I’m Bob Monkhouse,” and I said, “I know!” 
Then he said: “I love what you do.” He started talking about specific routines 
of mine that he liked best. I was bowled over. I couldn’t believe that he’d 
seen my stuff, and I started telling him about my favourite gags of his.

I asked him for advice on the Royal Variety, which is a notoriously difficult 
gig and where I had struggled before. It’s an older crowd, and they have often 
paid a lot of money for the charity tickets. “I bloody hate these 
performances,” Bob said. “Just play to the audience and let the TV cameras find 
you.”

They say you should never meet your heroes, but he was lovely. He was 
suffering from prostate cancer and he looked frail. But when the lights came on 
he straightened up, walked out and became the Bob Monkhouse we all loved.

He stormed it, doing lovely, self-deprecating material about his illness. Some 
comics try to be too clever, but Bob always kept it simple: “My health is 
improving,” he said, “but I was a bit disturbed when I drove past my local 
undertaker and there was a picture of me in the window that said ‘Coming 
soon.’” When he came offstage he wilted again. He died the following year.

Paul Zerdin’s UK tour starts on 8 April (paulzerdin.com 
<http://paulzerdin.com/>) 
