
The dilemma I’m a 13-year-old girl who is overweight. I’ve started to feel 
very uncomfortable and lonely in my own skin. All my friends have boyfriends 
and are living a wonderful life. I’m very close to one girl, but whenever I try 
to discuss problems which worry me, she immediately changes the topic. My only 
other friend has been ignoring me for two weeks. I’ve always been extremely 
good academically and have been the teacher’s pet for as long as I can 
remember. My counsellor has diagnosed me as someone with social anxiety and 
hypersensitivity, and now I feel like I’m depressed as well. My mother fails to 
understand my problems and I don’t know who to go to.

Mariella replies You’re not alone, even if you feel like it. I’d be far more 
worried if you were writing to tell me your life couldn’t be more fabulous! At 
13 years old that would be seriously weird. Instead you’re at the epicentre of 
one of the most turbulent periods you’ll experience, and I can promise you, no 
matter how it may look, all your friends are experiencing similar emotions. 
Teenage angst is legendary and comparable only to another equally hormonally 
busy phase in your early 50s, and that’s a lifetime away right now. Judging by 
your letter you are articulate, intelligent and literate and, believe it or 
not, those three qualities will come to matter far more than anything else as 
you mature.

In the meantime you have to negotiate the trials and tribulations of being an 
adolescent and, sadly, this period of hormonal turmoil comes with its fair 
share of physical manifestations, too. It’s a cruel twist of fate that when you 
are feeling at your most emotionally vulnerable your body decides to play havoc 
with you. Weight and moods fly up and down like a playground seesaw.

When I was your age my relationship with my physical attributes was totally in 
flux. One minute I considered myself fat and bloated, the next I was bemoaning 
the absence of anything vaguely feminine, like breasts or hips, on my boyish 
frame. My parents certainly couldn’t keep up with the helter skelter of my mood 
swings and, to be honest, neither could I. It was exhausting and debilitating 
to be trapped in my own head, a place where anxiety and insecurity about every 
aspect of my being fought for space.

The truth is that it doesn’t really matter how you look at this point, because 
you won’t feel it or see it. You’re a cygnet blooming into a swan and it’s a 
process that you simply have to be patient with, which I know is little 
comfort. We all know the story of the ugly duckling; it’s a fable that directly 
tackles the teenage condition. Even supermodels talk about their gawky teens as 
having been a period of misery. They were too tall, too skinny, and stood out 
from the crowd in a way that takes confidence and maturity to cope with.

To add further layers of complication, just when you most need a friendly 
shoulder to cry on, your girlfriends are acting oddly as well. Remember that 
they are experiencing similar mood swings and sensitivities and it’s all too 
easy to cause offence or be obscured by a new favourite. Girls go through a 
period of volatility with their friendships which unfortunately coincides with 
the time when a trustworthy pal would be worth their weight in kindness.

I know you’re feeling equally frustrated with your mum, but she could be your 
greatest ally at the moment if you invested a little in your relationship. Just 
as your moods change frequently, your behaviour can be irrational, so you need 
to be patient when describing what you’re feeling. It’s a further irony that 
during a period when communication with others would help assuage your growing 
pains, you are perhaps unwelcoming to those best placed to help? At this stage 
in your development, friends will come and go, but your mum is right there, 
within arm’s reach and wanting only the best for you, even if she expresses it 
badly or doesn’t seem to fully understand.

Most of the time when people don’t get what we’re on about it’s because we’re 
explaining it badly, not because they lack the ability to see things from our 
point of view. In your turbulent early teens the best way to struggle through 
is to try to encourage the people who love you to support you rather than push 
them away.

Don’t let the torrent of hormones flooding through you dictate the experience 
of your teenage years. I still regret how little fun I had during a decade of 
my life where self-indulgence and irresponsibility were tangible possibilities 
and how much time I spent fretting about the future.

Your academic tendency is a lifeline. You would be in deeper and murkier water 
without that lively interest in learning. Keep up the good work, talk freely 
with your counsellor, worry less about the things that will only change with 
time, and let your mum be your best friend. Finally, keep a diary – it too can 
be a place of refuge.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>

• Comments on this article will be opened at 9am on Sunday 3 January.
