
The harrowing reports from the frontline of the refugee crisis, beamed on to 
our TVs and printed by newspapers, have had a strong emotional impact on many 
people safe at home. Yet the organisations covering the crisis have been 
surprised by the emotional toll it has taken on reporters trying to tell the 
story.

Counterintuitively, the very fact journalists are reporting from a position of 
safety about people in such dire situations is making it more difficult for 
even hard-bitten war reporters to cope with.

“For the combat veterans, I think some of them are particularly hard hit. 
There’s this feeling when you’re covering this kind of story in a war zone, 
you’re experiencing some of the same dangers as people around you,” says Phil 
Chetwynd, global editor-in-chief for Agence France-Presse. “The thing people 
have found very hard is that there is no danger to you at all, yet you’re 
watching boats being overturned and people drowning.”

BBC diplomatic correspondent Caroline Hawley, who has covered the Middle East 
extensively, returned recently from the Greek island of Lesbos, where she 
sensed the disconnect troubling some of her colleagues. “You’re prepared if you 
go into a conflict zone, you take your flak jacket with you … When you go to a 
war zone, you really put up the psychological barriers.”

War zones necessitate a certain type of mindset and a certain type of 
preparation. But the scale and proximity of the refugee crisis allowed 
organisations like the BBC to send a mixture of people, from veteran 
correspondents to those new to foreign deployments.

“Because you have this huge range and mix of people it is impossible to 
identify the kind of risks that you might come up against, the kind of trauma 
you might experience, because if you’re dealing with a war zone, you kind of 
know what you’re dealing with but this was unprecedented,” says Jonathan 
Paterson, BBC World newsgathering deployments editor.

When Patrick Kingsley became the Guardian’s first ever migration correspondent 
following a stint in Cairo, he was optimistic.

“There was something quite redeeming about the hopeful journey that people 
were going on,” he says. At the time, he hoped his unique role would make a 
difference. But by the end of the year, an exhausted Kingsley had travelled to 
20 countries and found himself questioning the value of his work.

“As time goes on … you’re just dealing relentlessly with the same wretched 
situation, whether you’re covering shipwrecks or seeing people being beaten up 
in Hungary. You’re seeing the same stupid responses from the EU and the same 
illogical policies that have no relation to what you’re seeing and people are 
telling you.”

Chetwynd says the challenges are exacerbated by the economic state of the news 
industry.

“One of the points that we as managers and journalists need to push is that it 
is actually incredibly important to keep doing this; we’ve seen the 
consequences and we have to keep mixing it up, we have to keep giving the 
people who are doing these stories other stories to do, being part of other 
coverage, give them a break from this kind of intense coverage day to day, but 
it’s a tough discussion to have just because of the state of our industry at 
this point in time.”

The taboo surrounding mental health also makes those decisions even harder. 
While it is certainly not the case that every journalist covering the refugee 
crisis has experienced an unexpected emotional toll, the issue seems greater 
than some are prepared to admit.

And although trauma affects everyone differently, both Chetwynd and Paterson 
say the crisis has taken an especially hard toll on many parents.

“I think the children thing is particularly poignant for a lot of people 
because a lot are parents and they found that a little more difficult than they 
were expecting to, not because we don’t see that in war and earthquakes … but 
again it’s back to that point, it’s mainland Europe and you don’t expect to see 
thousands of people walking along a track, crossing a border, heading past all 
those things that are so familiar to us,” says Paterson.

This collision of the familiar and foreign has been particularly challenging 
for Athens-based AFP video journalist Will Vassilopoulos. Since April 2015, he 
has visited Lesbos more than a dozen times. One of the hardest things for him 
has been moving between the worlds of work and family.

“For sure it changes [you], there is absolutely no doubt about that, it does 
change you as a parent,” he says.

“Colleagues of mine are affected differently. For me, for sure I am more 
tender with my children.

“If I were to say what is more difficult in this crisis, getting over the 
images of the dead people, or going on a mission that is long and then going 
home opening the door and automatically being a father and husband, I think 
that is the most challenging thing.”

Taking his family to Idomeni camp allowed his wife to better understand his 
work and his need to decompress when he returned home.

While acknowledging the impact on their mental wellbeing, journalists are 
keenly aware that reporting the stories of the refugees is completely 
incomparable to living them. “However tough it is to be on the road, it is much 
easier to be there sitting in a nice aeroplane than on a fishing boat,” says 
Kingsley.

But the impact is still likely to be long lasting, especially from moments 
such as the first time Vassilopoulos saw an Afghan child on Lesbos.

“Since then I have seen so many kids, but that specific image of the first kid 
I saw drenched and cold, I think I could probably draw his face now.”

• Hannah Storm is director of the International News Safety Institute, which 
is launching a confidential survey into the psychological effect of covering 
the refugee crisis
