
Deficient language skills and the assumption that "everyone speaks English" 
are costing the UK economy around £48bn a year, or 3.5% of GDP, according to 
research by Professor James Foreman-Peck for the Department of Business, 
Innovation and Skills (BIS).

Poor language skills act like a "tax on growth", hampering small to 
medium-size exporters, who are unable to employ the language specialists 
brought in by global companies, says Foreman-Peck, professor of economics at 
Cardiff Business School. It also deters non-exporters from trading 
internationally, he adds.

Foreign languages are crucial in all areas of business, says Bernardette 
Holmes, principal researcher of the British Academy's Born Global initiative – 
whether you're tailoring a product to the needs of a particular country and 
marketing it in a culturally sensitive way, or entering new markets and 
building relationships. A lack of languages can get companies in legal trouble 
too, she says: "Businesses can fall foul of all sorts of regulatory issues and 
cultural misunderstandings."

A British Chambers of Commerce survey, published this year, backs up 
Foreman-Peck's claim of "a substantial negative effect on exports that must be 
attributed to language complacency". It reveals that 62% of non-exporting 
companies looking for international opportunities regarded languages as a 
barrier to doing so, while 70% of exporters had no foreign-language ability in 
the countries in which they operate.

"English is fine if you want to buy things, but it's not the right language to 
use for people who want to sell things," says Nick Brown, CEO of Nikwax, a 
UK-based manufacturer of cleaning and waterproofing products that exports to 50 
countries and produces print materials in 48 languages.

Despite ensuring every export and sales employee is a linguist, Brown says not 
knowing some languages has damaged business opportunities. "We're doing a 
little bit of work with China and we're very aware that we're behind there. One 
of the reasons is the language problem – we don't have a Mandarin speaker."

Only 30% of firms say they have no need for foreign language skills, according 
to a 2013 Confederation of British Industry (CBI) survey. But Foreman-Peck 
notes that the amount of problems a company encounters is largely dependent 
upon how bold it is with its export strategy: "Firms that say they haven't 
experienced any cultural difficulties in exporting, export much less than those 
that say they have experienced cultural difficulties."

Despite most companies highly rating language skills, many find it "almost 
impossible" to find bilingual UK employees, says Holmes. The same CBI survey 
showed that only 2% of companies were "very satisfied" with the 
foreign-language skills of graduates.

This inevitably means companies employ foreign workers to plug the languages 
gap. Richard Hardie, non-executive chair of UBS, says that for jobs that 
require fluency in another language, UBS very often takes "expats seconded to 
London at some expense – and that's a cost we would rather do without".

Foreign languages are becoming ever more important in the global marketplace. 
If companies continue to be forced into looking abroad to fill key roles, it 
won't bode well for UK employment prospects.
