
The former Labour health secretary Andy Burnham has confirmed that he is 
considering running for mayor ofGreater Manchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester>, as the city gets a radical 
package of new powers within George Osborne’s “northern powerhouse” project.

Burnham, who is the MP for the Greater Manchester constituency of Leigh, has 
been approached about the job and is expected to make an announcement in the 
next few weeks.

Candidates for the major new role will be selected this summer and a poll will 
be held in 2017. Under so-called Devo Manc, Manchester and the surrounding 
city-region is set to receive new powers in health policy, transport and the 
economy.

The mayor will be one of a new breed of powerful local leaders who are 
expected to become national public figures. “It’s a massive job: you need 
somebody with actual experience, somebody with a record of delivering,” said an 
aide to Burnham.

The story emerged on Sky News but the aide insisted Burnham had not intended 
it to come out this evening whileLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> faces intense scrutiny over its 
performance in elections across the UK.

“Whatever the decision he will continue to serve the leader of the party and 
stay in the shadow cabinet,” the aide said.

If he does decide to leave Westminster, it will raise fears of an exodus of 
senior figures with governing experience as Labour MPs weigh up the chances of 
returning to government in 2020 and beyond.

Burnham stood for the Labour leadership in the wake of last year’s general 
election defeat but lost out to Jeremy Corbyn after appearing to vacillate over 
his approach to planned cuts to welfare spending.

He has played a prominent role over recent years in ensuring that the full 
details of the Hillsborough disaster were made public, leading to the new 
inquiry that reported last week. The home secretary, Theresa May, whom he now 
shadows in parliament, paid tribute to his determination to seek justice for 
the victims’ families.
