
The dilemma My dilemma concerns my workplace. A few months ago I was followed 
out by a male colleague, harassed and called a slut as I left a drunken leaving 
do. I now no longer work with this man, but I’m not happy about attending 
social functions with the company due to his presence and the way his behaviour 
seems acceptable to the group generally. The sector I work in is rather sexist 
and male-dominated – one male colleague said I have been marked as “delicate” 
for the way I reacted by formally raising the “slut” incident, which angered 
me. How can I deal with this issue?

Mariella replies Only this week I sat in a women’s networking event as a 
roomful of mature working women, from their 20s to their 50s, complained about 
the level of misogyny they have to deal with, and that’s before they get home. 
I was shocked at how much a fabric of these women’s lives sexist abuse appeared 
to be and how many of them, otherwise able, robust and independent, felt 
intimidated about bringing it up with their HR department or “superiors” to be 
dealt with appropriately. The politics of the playground – bawdy humour, 
jostling for attention and elevated testosterone levels – appear still to be 
rife in the workplace, and whether you’re bullied out of your job, or lose it 
surreptitiously for not “appreciating” the “banter”, it’s much the same thing 
for the victim.

Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who complain are 
identified as “difficult” or “humourless” or, in your case, “delicate”, so the 
anger and pain is muffled. We know bullying is the desperate tactic of losers, 
and for men still hoping to maintain the status quo it must be torture to see 
women infiltrating every walk of working life and excelling. No wonder the more 
neanderthally inclined strike out verbally or physically to try and put us back 
in our place – their whole way of life is not simply under threat but close to 
extinction. You’ve got to laugh, haven’t you – or have you?

Your letter prompted a quick rifle through the latest entries on the Everyday 
Sexism <http://everydaysexism.com/> website, which highlighted again how common 
and prevailing such attitudes are. One of their more recent posts did make me 
laugh. It came from the deputy editor ofElle, who had been at a networking 
event where a man asked what she did. “Ah, what can I tell you aboutElle?” was 
his reply as he set about deliveringhis thoughts about her job – his 
credentials for opining apparently not restricted by his own employment at a 
minor trade rag.

No wonder women get annoyed when faced with such hubris. But we also need to 
establish our boundaries of tolerance, and slipping away and avoiding conflict 
aren’t remedies but a form of surrender. It’s a tough old world out there, 
shaped in man’s image and taking an eternity to rework into a place fit for 
both sexes. The status quo having only been in flux for the past 100 years is a 
reason given for showing more patience as we push for change. I’d argue that 
2,000 years of being entirely subjugated makes setting things right an urgent 
priority.

A recent tip I read for queuing more swiftly was to get in the line with the 
largest number of men, as they are more impatient and therefore more likely to 
give up. I wonder how they’d be responding to such an elongated segue into an 
equal world? That said, our divisive approach to ending one of the greatest 
remaining human rights abuse of the contemporary world warrants examination. 
Hollering from the frontline of a monosexual opposition just doesn’t seem to be 
doing the trick. Every man out there has a mother and perhaps a sister, a 
partner or wife, or daughter, or auntie, and definitely a grandmother. In fact 
at least 50% of their closest relatives are likely to be female. So men, too, 
are stakeholders in this brave new world of equal opportunity and remuneration. 
It’s not as if we want to take something away from the guys, apart from the 
boredom of a solely masculine world. Securing our fair place will see us 
lending a bit of yang to their yin.

We are light years past that 70s ideal of bra-burning women eschewing their 
femininity to prove they are were worthy of inclusion. Now all but the most 
bigoted accept that a society where responsibility is shared between both sexes 
and all genders is as close to utopia as we’re going to get. For those for whom 
such a heaven on earth lacks obvious appeal, then the conclusions inWomen in 
the Workplace 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/organization/women_in_the_workplace>(a new 
report from McKinsey and Lean In) might persuade. Published this autumn, it 
concludes that gender equality would add $12 trillion-worth of growth to the 
global economy. For those not moved by simple fairness, you’d have to be a 
total moron not to be swayed by the financial imperative. Employment law is on 
your side and you can get advice from theEquality Advisory and Support Service 
<http://www.equalityadvisoryservice.com/app/home> (0808 800 0082).

Not everyone is a revolutionary, but we do all need to dirty our hands in the 
fight. You’re no longer working with this man, but it is still worth taking 
action. Whether you go straight to HR or simply step out of the shadows and 
refuse to be intimidated is your choice, but you can’t just cower in the 
gloaming. If he were still there, the first strike could have been a simple one 
– placing a copy of this magazine, open on this page, on his desk. I wonder if 
he’d have understood all the big words.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
