
It is “deeply regrettable” that thousands of couples who settled their 
divorces in the past 20 months might have to reopen negotiations due to a
software error revealed by the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/17/revealed-divorce-software-error-to-hit-thousands-of-settlements>
, Michael Gove has said.

The justice secretary apologised to all those hit by faults with “Form E” on 
his ministry’s website, which has been miscalculating assets since April 2014, 
potentially inflating the financial worth of a spouse.


Related: Revealed: divorce software error hits thousands of settlements 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/17/revealed-divorce-software-error-to-hit-thousands-of-settlements>

The error was spotted earlier this month by a family law specialist, Nicola 
Matheson-Durrant of theFamily Law Clinic 
<http://www.familylawclinic.co.uk/contact-us.html> in Ascot, Berkshire. The 
Ministry of Justice only publicly admitted to the problem on Thursday and has 
published an email address –formE@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk 
<mailto:formE@hmcts.gsi.gov.uk> – asking anyone who believes they have been 
affected to contact the department.


Speaking on the World at One on BBC Radio 4 on Friday, Gove said: “It is 
deeply regrettable that a form was online since April 2014, which has meant … 
up to 17,000 people may have had the allocation of resources, at what is an 
inevitably stressful time in their life, miscalculated.”


Gove offered his apologies to all those affected.

One particular paragraph, numbered 2.20, which is supposed to produce totals, 
fails to reflect the minus figure of final liabilities entered earlier on, 
producing a simple mathematical error. If a party had significant debts or 
liabilities, they were not recognised or recorded on the electronic form, 
potentially inflating their true worth. Distorted net figures of applicants’ 
assets were therefore being produced.

Not all divorcing or separating couples use the online form – some prefer pen 
and paper calculations – but the impact of the errors could be widespread.

The discovery comes at a time when the senior judiciary and the justice 
secretary are encouraging the development of online justice as a means of 
improving courtroom efficiency and making further economies.

Earlier this year an official report backed by the master of the rolls, Lord 
Dyson, recommended that the UK civil justice system undergoa radical overhaul 
for the digital age 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/feb/16/online-court-proposed-to-resolve-claims-of-up-to-25000>
, with the creation of an online court to expand access to justice and resolve 
claims of up to £25,000.

Those most likely to have been affected by the divorce form’s miscalculations 
are litigants who could not afford to employ a lawyer and who had more modest 
assets, where the disparity may have been less immediately noticeable.

A number of recent divorcees who experienced difficulties with the form 
contacted the Guardian. One man said he had emailed family justice officials in 
August 2014 to point out the error but the MoJ response had not acknowledged 
that there was a fault. He eventually printed out the form and entered correct 
figures by hand.

Another man, who wished to remain anonymous, said he noticed the calculations 
left out debts or liabilities. He did not dispute it because, although a 
“significant sum”, it was relatively small compared to other disputed assets. 
He did not see the “workings” so assumed the solicitor had made a mistake in a 
manual calculation.

A third man, experienced in using spreadsheets, said he managed to overwrite 
the electronic website, adding a note in red letters pointing out the error and 
inserting corrected figures. “I realised it was throwing up false figures,” he 
said.

Jo Edwards, a solicitor who is chair of the family law organisation 
Resolution, called for additional court costs incurred by divorced couples to 
be paid by the government.

“Some of the thousands of people potentially affected by the unfortunate Form 
E error, many of them self-represented litigants, may need to return to the 
courtroom to have their financial settlements renegotiated,” she said.

“In these cases, I would expect any further court fees – £50 if agreement is 
reached and a consent order lodged with the court, £255 if there is no 
agreement and court proceedings need to be issued – to be waived, as the 
additional court costs will be incurred through no fault of the applicant’s own.

“However, it seems highly unlikely that the government will find itself liable 
for lawyer’s fees in these reopened cases – such a sum would be unquantifiable 
and place a huge strain on the public purse.”

Another family law expert, Carmel Brown, from the firm Thomas Eggar, said: 
“This error of the MoJ’s software is very basic but potentially catastrophic. 
In particular, it could seriously affect those people with large liabilities, 
including credit card debts, bank loans and tax liabilities, as the 
miscalculation would produce a wrong and misleading picture of their wealth.”

