
We are a lovely and mostly happy family of four renting a smallish two-bed 
flat with no garden in London. Last summer we were supposed to move to the 
Midlands, into my in-laws’ home. They had agreed we could move into their 
three-bed house and that we would rent them somewhere smaller in the area.

Last year, I went up to stay with them and it soon became apparent they had 
changed their minds and started showing me local listings for places we might 
like to rent for ourselves (which would be too expensive, adding in my 
husband’s commute back to London). Despite the fact that months earlier 
everyone had discussed it like it was a brilliant idea. I was upset but managed 
to keep my cool and I cut short our visit by a week. Without my husband around, 
I could hardly argue, and his father finds confrontation upsetting.

Both my in-laws are retired, and neither has worked for at least 10 years. 
They own the house outright. We have provided them with their only 
grandchildren of whom they are extremely proud, who they have set up regular 
trust-fund contributions for, and who they regularly spoil with things I would 
rather they didn’t bother buying.

We have various reasons for wanting to move back to the Midlands: it’s 
commutable to London, still within a day’s reach of our old friends and all the 
cultural stuff; it’s near my mum, who I don’t see enough of, and we want our 
kids to have the same sort of more nature-focused upbringing we had.

My mum still rents (due to a marriage breakdown when I was 16) and still works 
and contributes to the wider world. My mum is an absolute wonder and I miss 
seeing her.

I’m writing because I am angry. And getting angrier. We struggle in this poky 
flat while every day these people who haven’t worked a day in the last 10 years 
swim around in space and a garden they don’t need. They don’t socialise. We 
desperately want to own our own house and start building a future and a legacy 
for our children.

They had a golden chance to help us, and they chose not to. I am angry at 
them, and ultimately I am angry at myself for believing in such an impossible 
dream.

I do have some sympathy for you. The housing market is so screwed in London, 
especially, that even people earning lots of money can fail to get on the 
housing ladder. It can seem really unjust, seeing older people earning more on 
a pension than younger ones do doing a full-time job. I am glad you have 
acknowledged your anger, because my goodness you are angry aren’t you? And it’s 
entirely aimed at your in-laws, who you seem to think hold your future in their 
hands. But they don’t. You do.

I felt there were some inconsistencies in your longer letter, which you seem 
to fail to note. You accuse your mother-in-law of a lack of sensitivity but 
there were portions of your letter so lacking in it yourself, they were 
staggering. You say that your side of the family is great at confronting things 
and discussing them, but here you are with this giant thing festering away, and 
you’re not confronting it. What really stopped you just saying, “Oh, I thought 
we were going to move into yours?” there and then? What’s stopped you since?

Is a move to the Midlands, under your own steam, really out of the question, 
given how much rents are in London?

Generally, you seem full of resentment and I wonder why

There really is only one thing to do, and that is talk to your in-laws to 
clear the air. There may be reasons behind their decision you don’t know of and 
it may make it easier for you to understand if you know them. I agree, it would 
have been great if they could have just told you, but it was an immensely 
generous gesture in the first place (please don’t forget that – they didn’t 
need to make it, and they don’t owe you anything). If you don’t talk to them 
about it, this will fester for ever. You will blame everything that happens on 
it and it will drive a wedge between you and them, and ultimately, between you 
and your husband. Your anger will turn to bitterness and your children – who 
you are keeping from their grandparents because of this – will grow up hearing 
about the move that never was. Ultimately, they will judge you, not the 
in-laws. You really owe it to yourself, and your future happiness, to bring 
this out into the open.

You, generally, seem full of resentment and I wondered why. If you spin your 
story another way it would go like this: I’m happily married, with a lovely 
family, my husband has a job, I’m really close to my mum, my in-laws appreciate 
their grandchildren and we have friends. Don’t pin everything that’s wrong on 
to your in-laws.

I think a key part of your fear is your mum having to rent since you were 16. 
I sense an almost pathological fear of ending up with nothing, and a real 
disdain for renting (which, under the house swop, would have been OK for your 
in-laws).

Your life, your family, your future is happening now, right before your eyes. 
You’re looking in the wrong direction. You talk about building a legacy for 
your children, but not all legacies are monetary. Being able to recognise what 
you have is a real gift.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
