
Conservative ministers are rethinking their plans to slash funding for 
opposition parties in a way that could ease the pain forLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> but deal a blow to smaller parties 
such as Ukip and the Greens.

The government circulated a consultation on cuts to state funding known as 
Short money on Thursday, after George Osborne announced in the autumn that he 
wanted to reduce it by about 19% in line with reduced cash for Whitehall 
departments.

Related: Electoral Reform Society warns over funding cut for opposition parties
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/26/electoral-reform-society-state-funding-opposition-parties>

However, in the past few weeks, it has become clear 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/11/ministers-hint-at-compromise-on-opposition-party-funding-short-money>
 some backbench Conservatives are concerned that punishing the other parties 
with heavy cuts could come back to haunt them when they are in opposition in 
future. Opposition parties are warning that they could be forced to make 
redundancies and downsize as a result of the changes.


The document, due to be released by the Cabinet Office in parliamentary recess 
and on the day of the crucial European council summit, proposes a number of 
solutions that could ease the difficulties for opposition parties, but restates 
the case for cutting the overall Short money bill.

One option includes changing the weighting of how Short money is calculated to 
give more emphasis to the number of MPs a party has won and less emphasis to 
the number of votes.

This would benefit Labour and disadvantage Ukip and the Green party 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party>, which won millions of votes 
but only one seat each. As a concession, it suggests there could be a limit on 
how low party funding for the minor parties could go to prevent them being 
crippled by a 19% cut and reweighting of the formula.

“If there is a case for broader reforms, careful consideration should be given 
to the underlying purpose of Short money,” the proposal states. “Short money is 
funding to assist an opposition party in carrying out its parliamentary 
business. Expenses must be incurred exclusively in relation to that party’s 
parliamentary business.

“The current Short money formula is based on both the totality of votes cast 
at the general election and the total number of Commons seats won by an 
opposition party, along with an additional top-up for the official opposition. 
A case can be made that the weighting for MP representation in that formula 
should be greater, given the fundamental purpose of Short money is for 
parliamentary representation.”

It suggests that savings could be delivered by reducing the unit funding per 
votes cast and offset by an increase to the unit funding for the absolute 
number of MPs.

In a further concession, the document proposes a “grace period” so that 
savings would start from this summer rather than the spring to “give political 
parties three months’ space to implement efficiency savings”.

Related: Labour predicts trade union bill would cut party funding by £8m 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/04/labour-predicts-trade-union-bill-cut-funding-8m>

Despite the proposed compromise, Labour attacked the consultation as a 
“preposterously cynical, disingenuously hypocritical sham”.

Chris Bryant, the shadow leader of the Commons, said: “In opposition Tories 
argued Short money was vital to hold government to account – and took £46m. In 
government, they want to cut it for others.”

Ministers first hinted at concessions last week 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/11/ministers-hint-at-compromise-on-opposition-party-funding-short-money>
, amid signs of a brewing Tory revolt and concerns that similarly harsh 
measures could be enacted on them by a future Labour government.

The move comes on top of the government’s trade union bill which is expected 
to cut Labour’s funding from the unions by as much as £8m, as members will be 
forced to opt in to subscriptions rather than being automatically affiliated 
with the choice of opting out.

 Bernard Jenkin, the Tory chairman of the public administration and 
constitutional affairs committee, said he would investigate the Short money 
issue. “It is quite clear from these exchanges that the government has, if the 
policy is as reasonable as he insists ... handled this matter in a clumsy 
manner; that the opposition feels unconsulted. Or is it that there is an agenda 
behind this change which is rather more political in its intent?

“My committee has already had correspondence from another Conservative select 
committee chair expressing concern about this.

“We are looking into this and are going to inquire into this matter because I 
think all sides of this should have a fair hearing so these matters can be 
agreed by consensus.”

The system is named after the former minister Edward Short, who devised it in 
1974 to compensate opposition parties for not having access to Whitehall 
resources.

