
What does our tree say about us?


“For me, Christmas <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> is a 
time to stop, reflect and enjoy what you’ve got,” says Gilly. “We like making 
popcorn tinsel together – it’s an American thing.”

What the tree really says


Forget subtly coloured Instagram spruces, ignore Kirsty Allsop’s crocheted 
baubles, turn your nose up at anything secured with coloured twine… This, right 
here, is a proper Christmas tree. You can tell because not a single item that 
hangs from its branches matches anything else on there. There’s a too-big 
sparkly parrot; a bauble that looks like a Christmas pud; one that appears to 
be a rubber duck. A monkey. A teddy. Possibly a bath bomb. Nothing that would 
get more than 5p in a jumble sale. Good.

The best Christmas trees are completely tasteless, meaning taste just isn’t a 
factor. The decorations are gathered over years and consist of the odd spendy 
bauble (witness the huge purple orb towards the top of the tree) as well as 
some awful tat that one of the kids made when they were seven. This is one of 
those Christmas trees. It is made of memories.

There are two unusual aspects about this tree. The first is the tinsel: there 
is none. Instead Gilly, Lola and Ellison have chosen popcorn tinsel, an 
American invention consisting of bits of popcorn strung on to thread. I would 
usually reject this, because it’s a bit Kirsty-ly homemade, but the fact that 
it’s not harking back to a Hallmark past, plus it looks a bit rubbish, means 
that the popcorn tinsel happily mingles with the rest of the decorations.

The other odd thing about this tree is that there is no angel at the top. No 
star or fairy, not even Santa. This is because this family has sussed out what 
Christmas is about if you’re not a churchgoer. It’s about revelling in your own 
traditions, enjoying what you have, realising that a half-finished pompom can 
look just as fab as £15Conran Shop effort 
<http://www.conranshop.co.uk/christmas/decorations-and-lights/xmas-15-red-silver-drop-ornament.html>
 when it’s in the right environment – an environment full of love. Like I said, 
a proper Christmas tree. Happy Christmas.


If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
