
Anglo American and CARE International UK (CIUK) have signed a second 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) focused on improving the role of mining as a 
vehicle for positive change. The agreement, which builds on a 2008 MoU, 
establishes a core programme of activities to promote best practice in 
community development at mining sites; enhance the capacity and management 
skills of employees; and share expertise and insight between organisations.

Mark Cutifani, chief executive of Anglo American said: "The mining industry 
has enormous power to create positive change and Anglo American is committed to 
challenging the way we operate to create the best possible outcomes for local 
communities. We can achieve so much more for our stakeholders working together 
with NGOs, industry and government and our partnerships with organisations on 
the ground are critical."

"Our working relationship with CIUK spans some 10 years and our second MoU 
builds on the progress of our partnership to date. Our joint dialogue is honest 
and constructive and we value CIUK's expertise, its local insight and above all 
its willingness to challenge how we do things. Anglo American and CIUK share a 
common goal – to support broad-based socio-economic development in our host 
communities – and we look forward to continuing our work together to create 
value for all of our stakeholders."

Geoffrey Dennis, chief executive of CIUK said: "CARE International UK works to 
tackle the deep seated and root causes of poverty and believes companies will 
play an increasingly important role in the fight against poverty. Extractives 
can have an enormous social impact – positive or negative – on communities 
around the world. It is vital to improve this impact by addressing business 
practices and policies in the industry. This MOU with Anglo American is an 
example of how business and NGOs can commit to working together to ensure the 
most vulnerable communities and workers, especially women, impacted by Anglo 
American mines, have improved socio-economic development opportunities. We look 
forward to seeing the practical results and benefits in the near future."

Copy on this page is provided by Anglo American, sponsor of the social impact 
hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/social-impact?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
