
In the popular imagination, Surrey is synonymous with the stockbroker belt – 
but despite its leafy, prosperous reputation, the reality is more complicated. 
The county’s population of just over a million is ageing rapidly: nearly one in 
five is over 65, and many live to 100 and beyond. The closure of specialist 
hospitals catering for people with learning disabilities has meant those 
residents, many of whom have complex needs, are now cared for in the community.

It provides a challenge for adult social care. But despite being faced, like 
every other local authority, with a shrinking budget and an increase in demand, 
Helen Atkinson, strategic director of adult social care and public health, is 
determined to protect frontline services. “Frontline teams are vital to 
supporting people in need,” she says, “so we need to find new and innovative 
ways of working that help us reduce costs.”


Making sure that service users receive high quality care by, for example, 
enabling them to stay in their own homes for longer, is crucial. Atkinson adds: 
“People sometimes assume that savings are about cutting services, but sometimes 
they are about achieving better outcomes [from services].” Service users’ needs 
are central, and the county’s partnership boards enable residents with learning 
disabilities, for example, to have a say in how services are shaped.
 Helen Atkinson: ‘This is a very exciting time to join Surrey.’ Photograph: 
Surrey county council 
Atkinson, who was appointed to the role after a career in the NHS, sees a key 
part of the job as pushing forward the integration between health and social 
care. With five acute hospitals and six clinical commissioning groups in the 
county, it’s a complicated landscape, but while many authorities find the 
government’s 2020 target for integration challenging, Atkinson is meeting it 
head on. “We are working fast in Surrey,” she says. Multidisciplinary team 
working is already in place, and this spring the authority will start operating 
a shadow form of integration: “We already have staff who have come from a 
health background working in social care, and the health and social care 
workforce will be coming together much more in future years.”


The integration opens up plenty of possibilities, and Liz Uliasz, deputy 
director of adult social care, says most employees are excited about the new 
ways of working. The merger of the rapid response and reablement teams, for 
example, gives social care staff the opportunity to learn new skills and widen 
their career prospects.


The demands on adult social care are such that, at full capacity, the 
department has 2,500 employees. Committed to recruiting and retaining the best 
quality staff, Surrey offers a wide ranging package to its employees, including 
a competitive pay structure, 24 days holiday a year and a final salary pension 
scheme. The council recognises that staff have responsibilities outside work, 
so they can request different types of flexible working, such as part-time 
working and job shares. Employees can take time off to volunteer, and buy up to 
10 days, or sell up to three days, annual leave each year. The numerous voucher 
and discount schemes include childcare vouchers that enable staff to save up to 
£933 a year on Ofsted-approved childcare.


A strong commitment to the physical and mental wellbeing of staff has led 
Surrey to introduce discounted gym and health club membership, discounted 
health and wellbeing assessments and free eye tests. For further details on the 
range of benefits Surrey offers are availablehere 
<http://www.surreycc.gov.uk/jobs/why-work-for-surrey/benefits-of-working-for-surrey>
.


But what makes Surrey an attractive place to work isn’t just the benefits: the 
authority believes in nurturing its staff and bringing out the best in them. 
Staff who join the adult social care team benefit from a carefully planned 
induction to make sure they are fully confident in the job before they start 
work. “It’s not a case of people coming in on their second day picking up a 
caseload,” says Uliasz. “There’s a very clear induction process, and by the 
time they get into the team, they’ve had all their induction, we’ve identified 
their training and people know what’s expected of them.”

Employees are encouraged to develop their professional practice through 
training. “We have a real philosophy about ‘grow your own’,” says Uliasz. “We 
train our own social workers and our own occupational therapists, selecting a 
number of staff from the unqualified staff group to do their formal training.” 
Professional development opportunities enable staff to progress up the career 
ladder, she adds: “We have a great offer in terms of statutory training, but we 
also have county-wide opportunities, such as the high performance development 
programme.” Uliasz herself began working life as an occupational therapist in 
the NHS, before joining Surrey as a team manager and working her way up.


This emphasis on staff development extends to a comprehensive apprenticeship 
programme: all 11 locality teams have two or three apprentices, and many are 
encouraged to stay on as permanent members of staff.


These are challenging times for adult social care, but also exciting ones, as 
staff, residents and council partners all have their say in how the new 
integrated model of care will work. “I’ve been incredibly impressed since I 
joined the adult social care team by how passionate they are,” says Atkinson. 
“It’s tough in the public sector now, but they have held to their core values 
of making decisions around need of the individual.”


The commitment to offering the best quality services, and putting services 
users at the heart of what they do, makes Surrey a vibrant place to work. As 
Atkinson says: “We are actively recruiting frontline staff at all levels and 
this is a very exciting time to join Surrey.”

Find out more about all current opportunities 
<http://www.surreycc.gov.uk/jobs/job-sectors/adult-social-care-work>.


Content on this page is paid for and produced to a brief agreed by Surrey 
county council
