
Q My very stylish grandmother has given me one of her vintage leather skirts 
(knee length or just above). It's good quality, but I have no idea what shoes I 
can wear with it. Heels would be the obvious choice, but I do not and will not 
wear heels. Are there other options?
Jessica

A First work out how you're going to style up your leather skirt. Then the 
footwear will fall into place. If you really don't like high heels, why not try 
a military look? Not only is leather a key fabric in this trend, but the good 
news is that military styling has a great deal of variety. Be inspired by army 
or navy on parade or in the field. I suggest shopping for knitwear, as there 
are plenty of military-inspired pieces, from simple grey or navy knits to 
detailed jumpers and cardigans with epaulette or button detailing. Find a 
leather belt to wrap around your jumper and throw a blazer or cropped pea coat 
over the top, and finish off the outfit with a flat riding boot. The end result 
is very sophisticated - and not a heel in sight.

Q I love wearing bangles and own tons of inexpensive colourful ones. Now I 
want to splash out on something more expensive - a bracelet that makes a bit of 
a statement. Have you seen any around?
Nancy

A Bangles are a key accessory this season because with all the detailed and 
embellished necklines on tops and dresses, it's hard to wear a necklace without 
looking fussy. It's a good time to invest in something special, as there's a 
large choice of styles in a variety of materials. Tod's colourful plaited 
leather and gold bracelet (£115) works well for daywear. For a bold statement, 
Lanvin's coloured chunky small, medium and large-width Perspex bangles 
(£80-£95) brighten up a simple black dress, especially when layered together - 
a look seen at Louis Vuitton using pretty silver bracelets (£665 and £630). If 
you want something more neutral and timeless, the Branch at Browns has 
collectable, large silver-lined wooden bangles (£115). And if you really want 
to splash out, my favourite is Chanel's black bangle with tiny studs (£890). 
Lovely jewellery is an investment which you can wear forever - so have fun 
choosing

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
