
When Sara started university, she was delighted to see she had just eight 
hours of contact time with her lecturers. “After putting in full days at school 
for God knows how many years, it felt great to have that freedom,” she says.

But by the end of her first year of her politics degree, she was feeling 
disillusioned. “None of my lecturers knew my name, I got very little feedback 
on my work and felt as if I had been left to fend for myself. I’d sit down in 
front of the reading I had to do and some of the concepts were so difficult … I 
found it overwhelming and disheartening.”


Now in her final year, with the prospect of around 27k of tuition fees to 
repay, she’s questioning whether her degree course was worth the investment.

Related: University league tables 2016 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>

But measuring value-for-money purely on contact hours can be a “huge red 
herring,” says Johnny Rich, chief executive of university guide Push. “For most 
courses, more contact hours does not mean better teaching and learning. Indeed, 
more contact hours could potentially be a distraction from your studies,” he 
says.


Rich argues that value-for-money can be measured against many factors, 
including student experience (living conditions, extra-curricular activities 
and pastoral care, for example), long-term earning potential, health and 
happiness.


“A lot of discussion about value-for-money tends to focus on satisfaction, 
which is another red herring, as it depends on expectation as much as 
delivery,” he says. “Higher education is something you do, not something that 
happens to you. So what you put in to it is as much a measure of 
value-for-money as what you get out of it. That doesn’t mean universities can 
blame students for their own inadequacies, but the idea of a student as merely 
a consumer is only half the picture.”


And as Susan Burke, careers adviser and creator of the 90 Day Career Kick 
Start Plan points out, perceptions of value-for-money can vary. For George 
Highton, who secured his place studying ancient history at the University of 
Nottingham throughClearing <http://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing>, it 
is less about contact hours and more about reputation. When he missed the 
grades to study history and politics at the University of Liverpool, he opted 
for ancient history at Nottingham - even though it wasn’t his first-choice 
subject - because he wanted to go to a high-ranking university. “I felt that if 
I didn’t go to a Russell Group university it wasn’t going to be worth it, 
because other places just lack that prestige on your CV,” he says.


But Burke warns against measuring value-for-money purely against academic 
reputation. When choosing what to study and where, there are many factors 
students should take into account, from how the course is assessed – an “exam 
only” syllabus could set some students up for failure, she says – to how much 
support the university offers with work experience or job-hunting.

Related: Clearing: a second chance to move forward 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/03/clearing-a-second-chance-to-move-forward>

“Higher education is expensive - probably one of the biggest purchases you’ll 
ever make,” she says. “That’s why I often tell students they should approach it 
like they’re buying a top-of-the-range car. You wouldn’t make that kind of 
investment without doing some serious research about the best model to buy for 
your needs. So you shouldn’t skimp on research about your education. ”

No last-chance saloon: I was surprised how many places there were on reputable 
courses

 Jodie Kirkland recently completed a degree in Film and Television at 
Southampton Solent University

 Jodie Kirkland wanted her course to prepare her for the world of work. 
Photograph: Michael Thomas Jones 
I took a few years out after A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> before applying for university 
through Clearing. At around £7k, the tuition fees were a bit lower than other 
universities when I started, but that wasn’t really why I chose Solent. I was 
more impressed by the facilities and the promise of lots of contact time with 
my tutors.

The university has its own professional-standard TV studios and most of my 
lecturers had recent experience of working at big media companies like the BBC 
and Channel 4, which meant I got up-to-date knowledge and understanding of the 
industry.


Hearing them give real examples of challenges they’d faced on programmes 
they’d worked on - and how they dealt with them - was invaluable.


They also had great contacts; one lecturer organised a visit to BT Sport, 
where we got to see the Clare Balding show being recorded live and met 
directors, editors and camera operators. Others have given me leads for work 
experience and helped with job applications.


I’d always thought Clearing was a kind of last-chance saloon for people who 
didn’t get their grades, so I was surprised how many places there were on 
reputable courses, at good universities.


Having opted for a vocational course, getting value-for-money from my degree 
programme was about being prepared for the world of work. I definitely feel I 
got that.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
