
The advertising watchdog is to crack down on the way broadband packages are 
marketed after research showed that four in five people were not able to work 
out how much they are supposed to pay.

The Advertising Standards Authority <http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> is 
to start a crackdown on the way companies including Sky, BT, Virgin Media, 
TalkTalk, EE, 3 and O2 advertise after finding that the public are confused and 
misled by broadband deals.

The ASA is to introduce new advertising rules from 30 May following research, 
conducted with media regulator Ofcom, that found widespread confusion, with 81% 
of those surveyed not able to correctly work out the total cost across the 
lifetime of a broadband contract when asked to do so.

Currently, broadband ads feature an array of prices including the monthly cost 
of the broadband itself, separate line rental and frequently a raft of 
additional pricing options such as installation fees, introductory offers and 
contract length.

The research found that just 23% of survey participants were able to correctly 
work out the total cost per month of a broadband package and all extras in the 
first viewing of an ad. And 22% of participants were still not able to get it 
right at a second viewing of a broadband deal ad.

The ASA says that if this proportion were extrapolated to the whole of the UK 
it means that about 4.3m households have no idea how much they are actually 
paying for their broadband packages.

“It’s essential we make sure people aren’t misled by pricing claims in 
broadband ads,” said Guy Parker, chief executive of the ASA. “We’ll be moving 
quickly, working alongside broadband providers to clarify the presentation of 
price information.”

From 30 May, the ASA is going to crack down on ads that have complicated 
pricing, and will rule that they break the UK advertising code.

While companies can continue to choose how they want to market broadband deals 
after that date, the ASA is “suggesting” a series of guidelines.

These include using an all-inclusive price on all costs, including line 
rental, and greater prominence of up-front costs and contract lengths.

“Ofcom wants to see clear and accurate broadband prices for consumers,” said 
Sharon White, chief executive of Ofcom. “Our research shows many people are 
confused by complicated ads and offers. We welcome the ASA’s plans to simplify 
broadband advertising.”

The ASA said that last year it received 730 complaints about a total of 555 
broadband ads.

It ruled that 56 of the broadband ads were in breach of the UK advertising 
code, a relatively high 10% of all cases

“Simplifying how broadband prices are advertised is a step in the right 
direction, but the advertising of broadband speeds must also be tackled,” said 
Richard Lloyd, executive director of consumer watchdog Which? “Broadband is an 
essential part of life and millions of homes are not getting the speed they 
expect. We want the advertising authorities and the regulator to change the 
rules and ensure consumers get the speeds they are promised by their provider.”

TalkTalk said that it fully supported the ASA’s move, pointing out that it had 
already called for “all-in” pricing in a response to Ofcom’s digital 
communications review.

“It’s obvious that a single headline price is much clearer and better for 
customers, and we’re actually already doing it on a pilot project up in York,” 
said a spokeswoman for TalkTalk. “But until the whole market moves to single 
prices, any company that advertises its products like this will struggle to 
compete with what look like better deals from other providers. We want Ofcom to 
be bold and tackle this problem in their strategic review and we would 
absolutely support them in doing so.”

Sky said that it follows all advertising rules and that it has the best 
customer satisfaction levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/15/bt-tv-complaints-double-after-champions-league-coverage-starts>
 in the industry.


“We work hard to ensure customers are fully informed when we’re marketing 
Sky’s products and services and our advertising adheres to all industry 
guidelines,” said a spokeswoman. “Ofcom’s recent customer service report showed 
our customer satisfaction levels are the highest in the industry. We will 
review the new research and work with the ASA to ensure our advertising is in 
line with any new guidance it introduces.”
