
"Ripe avocado emergency!" It's New Year's Eve and my best friend is calling in 
a panic. She's making a Mexican feast for 10and has visited three large 
supermarkets hunting for ripe avocados 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/nov/16/consider-the-avocado>
, to no avail. Not because there are none in stock, but because all the "ripe 
and ready" ones ... just aren't.

Two weeks later I'm in another supermarket rifling through the "ripe" 
avocados. A lady in her 60s is doing the same, and together we lift three 
pallets containing around 80 packets, all rock-hard, before she gives up with a 
cry of: "Ripe and ready, indeed!"

And it seems these aren't isolated incidents. When I asked on Twitter if 
anyone else had been searching in vain, I got a big response. "I've just become 
accustomed to pre-planning when using the buggers," was one reply, and, "I buy 
several days in advance and put them in the airing cupboard. Even the 
ready-to-eat ones!" was another.

Bemoaning the lack of ripe avocados sounds trivial, of course, but it raises a 
more serious question. A twin pack of "ripe" avocados costs £2 in most 
supermarkets. "Ripen at home" ones are often — though not always — sold for 
less (around £1.50 for a four-pack). How are supermarkets able to charge a 
premium for fruit and veg marketed as ready to eat, when in some cases it isn't?

Unfortunately, consumers don't have many options when "ripe and ready" produce 
fails to deliver — it's far from confined to avocados. In their respective 
seasons, I've bought "ripe" pears with the yield of a pebble, and "ripe" mangos 
and nectarines that are anything but.

"There is no legislation that relates solely to this situation," says David 
Pickering, food lead officer of theTrading Standards Institute 
<http://www.tradingstandards.gov.uk/>. "The Food Safety Act section 15 relating 
to misleading descriptions will apply, but we would need to prove beyond all 
reasonable doubt that the description is misleading." If it doesn't say 
"guaranteed" on the packet, there's not a lot you can do.

If you've bought the produce and it isn't "ripe and ready" you can approach 
the store for a refund or replacement. But if there are simply no ripe ones in 
store that day, then tough cheese. Or, tough avocados.

Given the UK avocado market was reportedly worth £51m in 2012, it's no 
surprise that all the major supermarkets go to great pains to get their fruit 
"ripe and ready". Avocados ripen off the tree. They are picked when firm and 
transported to the UK, kept in climate-controlled temperatures en route. 
"Avocados are ripened by the suppliers here in the UK," explains an industry 
insider. "The avocados are in boxes on palettes and warm air gets blown into 
the spaces between them, evenly warming the fruit and allowing them to ripen 
quicker." Tesco uses a "bespoke avocado texture analyser" according to a 
spokesperson, which uses "acoustic testing" to check for ripeness. The 
suppliers will also test a batch using apenetrometer 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penetrometer>, and Tesco tests again at its 
depot. Asda also uses "infra-red to test internal quality" while Sainsbury's 
uses mature avocados with high oil content and says its Ripe & Ready avocados 
are "fully ripened in specialist ripening rooms". Waitrose "accurately 
forecasts future demand" in its battle to get its Perfectly Ripe avos on the 
shelves.

Meanwhile Asda has introduced new traffic-light packaging for its avocados – 
green for ripe, orange for "nearly ripe" and pink for "requires a little more 
time". "The days of avocado guess work will soon be a distant memory!" says 
Asda's avocado buyer, Damien Gray.

So the mystery of my rock-hard "ripe and ready" avocados remains. The 
supermarkets have invested in serious kit to get their avos on the shelves in 
perfect condition, but it seems fruit and veg can't always be coerced into 
optimum ripeness. Meanwhile, I'm learning to give up on spontaneous avocado 
buying, settling for hard avocados, and my own DIY ripening room … a brown 
paper bag containing the avos and a banana. The bananas produce ethylene gas 
which helps ripen other fruits.

Works every time.

Have you been frustrated by so-called "ripe and ready" produce? Where do you 
find the best avocados?
