
The legacy of more than 700 years of Moorish occupation is apparent in 
Andalucia's culinary traditions and exotic ingredients – including coriander, 
cinnamon, olives, figs, dates, aubergines, sugar cane, rice and vines – as well 
as in Arabic cooking styles, such as the use of dried fruits and honey in 
savoury recipes.

But for me, Andalucia is also associated with childhood holidays – 
particularly the area around Puerto de Santa Maria. I can still recall the long 
trips from our home in Extremadura to Cadiz, which took six overpoweringly hot 
hours in the back of a Citroën 2CV. Though thankfully, these days the journey 
is a lot quicker.

Now I visit this part of Spain not only for holidays but for work. The heat 
and long hours of sunshine make this blessed region the source of pomegranates, 
persimmons, passion fruit, and a vast array of olives and oils that I use in my 
kitchen and feature in many of the recipes I have in my restaurants.

Being a chef offers me the perfect excuse to visit the south whenever I can 
and stroll through Seville when the orange trees are in bloom, to visit the 
Alhambra of Granada or the mosque at Córdoba, witness the horse races along the 
beach at Sanlúcar de Barrameda, or spend summer nights eating freshly fried 
fish on a terrace or enjoy a lazy afternoon with friends moving from one tapas 
bar to another.

Salmorejo-style tomato soup 

A rich, thick and creamy chilled bread soup made without water, which relies 
on the juice from fresh tomatoes. It is usually garnished with Serrano ham, 
which I crisp up, and chopped hard-boiled eggs. Salmorejo is typically found in 
Córdoba, but is enjoyed throughout Spain.

Serves 6-8
country-style bread slightly stale with crusts removed 340g (crustless weight)
vine-ripened tomatoes ripe and juicy, skinned, 1kg 
garlic 3 cloves, crushed 
pinch of sugar if your tomatoes need it
olive oil 150ml, plus extra to serve
sherry vinegar 2 tbsp
eggs 2, large 
Serrano ham 6-8 thin slices
olives good-quality green or black pitted and quartered lengthways 50g 
sea salt

Break the bread into a bowl and sprinkle with 250ml water. Leave to soak for 
at least 30 minutes. Meanwhile, quarter the tomatoes and scoop out the seeds 
into a sieve set over another bowl. Roughly chop the flesh and rub the juices 
from the seeds through the sieve. Discard the seeds.

Put the tomato flesh and juices, garlic and sugar (if using) into a liquidiser 
and blend until smooth. Squeeze as much water as you can from the bread, add 
the bread to the liquidiser and blend again. With the motor still running, pour 
in 150ml of the oil, the vinegar and 1½ tsp salt. The mixture should be thick 
but not stiff. Pour into a bowl, cover and chill for at least 2 hours. Chill 4 
small soup bowls.

Shortly before serving, lower the eggs into a pan of boiling water and cook 
for 9 minutes. Drain, cover with cold water and, when they are cold, peel off 
the shells and roughly chop the eggs into small pieces. Heat the remaining tbsp 
of oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat. Add 2 slices of ham side by 
side and fry for about 30 seconds on each side until crisp and lightly golden. 
Lift on to kitchen paper to drain and cool. Repeat with the remaining ham. Once 
it is cold, crumble into small pieces.

To serve, spoon the soup into the chilled bowls and garnish with the chopped 
egg, crisp ham and olives. Drizzle over a little more olive oil and serve 
straight away.

Prawns baked in salt with anis and fennel herb mayonnaise

Whenever I visit Huelva, I always go to a restaurant called Casa Machaquito in 
Islantilla and have langostinos (large king prawns) baked in salt. The casing 
of salt seals in the flavour of the prawns and enhances the taste of the sea. I 
like to add fennel seeds to the salt mixture and then echo this in some 
mayonnaise, flavoured with anis and fennel herb, for dipping.

Serves 4
egg white of 1 large
coarse rock salt 2.5kg 
fennel seeds 4 tbsp, lightly crushed 
prawns 20, large, raw and unpeeled 

To serve
olive oil mayonnaise (see below) 150ml 
anis or Pernod 1½ tsp 
fennel 1 tbsp, chopped 

For the olive oil mayonnaise
eggs yolks of 2 large
lemon juice 2 tsp 
sea salt flakes ½ tsp 
extra-virgin olive oil 150ml 
sunflower oil 150ml 

For the mayonnaise, put the egg yolks, lemon juice and sea salt into a mixing 
bowl and lightly blend. Gradually whisk in the oils until thick and 
silky-smooth.

For the prawns, preheat the oven to 200C/ gas mark 6. Whisk the egg white 
until it forms soft peaks. Stir in the rock salt and fennel, then spread half 
the mixture in a 1.5cm-thick layer over the base of a large roasting tin.

Lay the prawns side by side on top of the salt and cover with the remaining 
mixture, ensuring that the prawns are completely covered. Bake in the oven for 
8 minutes, by which time the prawns should be cooked through. If they are very 
thick and meaty, give them an extra couple of minutes.

Remove the tin from the oven and break open the now hard salt crust. Lift the 
prawns on to a serving plate. Stir the anis and fennel into the mayonnaise and 
serve with the prawns.

Crisp deep-fried aubergine fritters with honey

This is a really good, easy tapas. The delicious, subtle flavour of the 
aubergine comes through and the crispy coating and sticky honey make it a 
heavenly dish.

Serves 4-6
aubergines 300g, in 7-8mm-thick slices 
plain flour 110g 
olive oil 5 tbsp, plus extra for deep-frying 
cold water 150ml 
egg whites 2 
clear honey for drizzling
fine sea salt

Sprinkle the aubergine slices lightly on both sides with salt and set aside 
for 30 minutes. Sift the flour into a bowl, make a well in the centre and add 
the oil and water. Gradually beat together to make a smooth batter. Set aside 
to rest, along with the aubergines.

Pat the aubergine slices dry with kitchen paper. Pour 1cm of olive oil into a 
large deep frying pan and heat it to 180C.

Whisk the egg whites into soft peaks and fold them into the batter. Dip the 
aubergine slices, a few at a time, into the batter, add them to the hot oil and 
deep-fry for 1 minute on each side until crisp and golden. Leave to drain 
briefly on kitchen paper and serve drizzled generously with honey.

Deep-fried chicken wings al ajillo

Serves 6
chicken wings 24, large and meaty
olive or sunflower oil for deep-frying 

For the ajillo
garlic 6 fat cloves 
extra-virgin olive oil 6 tbsp 
dried chillies 1½ tsp, crushed 
sweet pimentón 1½ tsp 
sherry vinegar 4 tsp 
sea salt

Cut off the pointy tips from each chicken wing and discard. Dry the wings on 
kitchen paper. Heat the oil for deep-frying to 180C. Add a quarter of the 
chicken wings and cook for 6-7 minutes until crisp and golden.

For the ajillo, put the garlic cloves on a board, sprinkle with salt and crush 
into a smooth paste with the blade of a knife. Put the extra-virgin olive oil 
and garlic in a small pan over a medium-low heat. As soon as the garlic begins 
to sizzle, add the crushed dried chillies and cook very gently for about 2 
minutes, until the garlic is very lightly golden. Stir in the pimentón and 
sherry vinegar and remove from the heat.

As soon as the first chicken wings are cooked, drain them on kitchen paper, 
tip into a serving bowl and drizzle with the warm garlic and chilli dressing. 
Toss together, sprinkle with sea salt and serve hot. Repeat with the remaining 
wings.

Spanish Flavours by José Pizarro is published by Kyle Books at £19.99. To 
order a copy for £15.99 with free UK p&p go totheguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://theguardian.com/bookshop> or call 0330 333 6846. 

José takes part in Feast (wefeast.co.uk <http://wefeast.co.uk>) today at Guy's 
Hospital, London.

Next week: recipes from Extremadura 
