
I walk over to the allotment, intending to bodge my shed roof back together. 
If my shed roof was a metaphor for my life – that is, scraps of plastic, a few 
sheets of corrugated iron sheeting secured by broken limbs from trees, and 
under all that a very large hole and rotten timber – then I’d be very broken 
and badly patched. Thankfully, it is just a shed roof. I can choose to look at 
it as a metaphor, or I can accept that repairing it hasn’t been much of 
a priority, and just resecure the corruguated iron sheets with frozen fingers: 
winter has danced across the garden.

Well, my fruit cage is in a similar state to my shed roof. I pull apart the 
broken timber and remove the netting. This is the first rule of fruit cages 
(and one that I have singularly failed to follow, much like choosing to fix the 
shed roof in summer, rather than in the depths of winter): never leave the 
netting on over winter. If the wind doesn’t whip it to shreds, snow will weigh 
it down until the frame breaks; plus, it’s also important that the fruit gets a 
little wild, cageless time.

Without the faff of netting, the idea is that you will then get on with 
weeding, and after you do that, the birds can move in for a welcome winter 
feast. They will eat any leftover fruit that may be rotting (this is 
particularly important with grapes, because rotting fruit can cause diseases to 
spread very quickly) and dig around in the soil for larvae and eggs. When they 
have had their fill and you have finished weeding, you can then mulch.

Do this on warmer days, though; you don’t want to trap frozen soil under a bed 
of mulch, as it will take longer to warm up in spring. A layer of well-rotted 
homemade compost, bark mulch or leafmould will do wonders for this year’s 
fruit, by adding new organic material to thesoil food web 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Soil_food_web> (all the good guys from microbes 
to worms that make the soil magical and help plants feed). It will also 
suppress weed seeds from germinating in spring and protect the top layer of 
soil from eroding in the worst of what winter has left in store for us.

Not everyone has a fruit cage, of course, but much the same principles apply 
to plants in pots and borders, too. Get on top of the weeding now, encourage 
the birds to come in – put feeders up around fruit bushes, so they can have a 
good rummage – and mulch when the weather allows. Do this, and your fruit will 
largely look after itself until you need to start worrying about caging it 
again later in the year, to protect your bounty.

Related: Alys Fowler: a rose for every situation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/21/alys-fowler-roses-gardens> 

Some of the best pollinators for fruit bushes are fat bumblebee workers, yet 
I’ve seen many a confused bee eyeing up its next meal only to realise that it 
is not able to get anywhere close because the netting is too fine. So, if you 
are thinking of investing in netting for your precious fruit, make sure the 
mesh is wide enough for pollinators to get in and out. Soft black fruit netting 
is the best: it is not cheap, but it will last for years and it is flexible, 
which means it will stretch over odd-shaped spaces, and is easy to repair.
