
In 1993 I spoke to my father by phone: he was living in Hawaii and I in 
London. He sounded confused, as if he was struggling for words. He was 88, and 
I discovered that he had had a number of small strokes, so that his speech was 
affected. I decided I should fly to Hawaii and see for myself.

My father was a successful artist and had a beautiful waterfront house on the 
windward shore ofOahu 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/15/top-10-national-state-parks-hawaii>
. He loved Hawaii, his pictures were well known and sold well, and he was very 
happy with Hope, his third wife. However, when I arrived, it was clear that he 
was in the early stages of dementia.

But his personality remained unaffected, and we sat on his deck and were able 
to talk, after a fashion. At one point he started talking about matter, space 
and rotation. It was all very garbled, but I knew what he was trying to say.

He was trying, still, to explain the Theory.

The Theory! My father had worked on it in his spare time for the whole of his 
adult life. He had told my mother about it when they first met in the 1920s, 
and it was nothing less than a Theory of Everything – the kind Stephen Hawking 
has talked about.

My father knew nothing about modern physics and there was no prospect of him 
learning such things, as he never got on with formal education of any sort. But 
he saw this as no problem. I suspect he was impressed by Albert Einstein, who 
became quite a media star during my father’s youth. Unknown clerk in Swiss 
patent office revolutionises modern physics! Well, if Einstein could do it, why 
couldn’t he?

It should be clear at this point that my father had invincible self-belief. He 
was convinced that if he thought about what made the universe tick for long 
enough, he could figure out the answer.

Basically, as far as I can understand (and I can say, without fear of 
contradiction, that I understand more about the Theory than any other living 
person), the universe is made of some kind of conscious “stuff”, and that this 
stuff circulates and eddies, and as it does so, it rubs against itself. Being 
conscious, it enjoys certain angles of rubbing, and the circles and eddies 
create atoms, molecules, energy, forces, etc, etc.

But above its role in the makeup of the universe, the Theory came to have a 
very important role in my relationship with my father because, from a very 
early age, I saw very little of him.

I was born when my mother was 40 and my father had a studio in Greenwich 
Village, New York, and didn’t return home for days at a time. He said he needed 
the studio to pursue his art, and rumour had it that he also used it to pursue 
various women. Then he met Hope and soon asked for a divorce. My mother spent 
the rest of her life telling me, endlessly, how badly he had treated her, how 
she had supported him and he had cast her aside. Well, that was true, but kind 
of hard for a child of nine or 10 to hear.

My father did regularly pay child support. Other than that, he would come once 
a week and take me to dinner. He would drink a martini and, while I was eating 
my shrimp cocktail, talk about his Theory. Aged about 10 or 11, I was very 
interested in science. My father never asked me about school or what I was 
doing; instead he talked about the Theory. I remember him saying once that he 
thought I was beginning to understand it, which must have reflected my skill in 
concealing my total bafflement.

He also assured me that the Theory would have profound consequences throughout 
the world. In particular, it would end the cold war. You see, he would say, the 
Russians, being very logical people, would realise the truth of his Theory, and 
thus realise that the universe was, in a sense, conscious. Thus the universe 
could be considered a kind of God. When the Russians saw that they had to 
abandon atheism, they would understand that Marxism as a whole was incorrect, 
and would cease their evil communist ways and become good capitalists!

When I grew older, my father and Hope moved to Hawaii and I seldom saw him, 
aside from very occasional visits to Hawaii and one visit he and Hope made to 
London. But the drafts of the Theory never stopped arriving.

Each would be between three and eight pages long, written in incomprehensible 
prose. A typical sentence might read, “Imagine a moving place that travels 
through distance with force.” As draft followed draft, I struggled to make any 
meaningful comment. If you wrote with a question, like “What is a moving 
place?” or how does moving with force differ from moving without force, you 
never received an answer, but only an equally incomprehensible new draft. There 
was almost never any mathematics in it. Also, and this is key, there were never 
any empirical predictions. When Newton hypothesised the existence of a 
universal force of gravity, he wrote equations to predict the motion of the 
planets. For example, scientists planning space probes still use Newton’s 
equations to plot their flight. My father’s Theory was useless. Why do the 
planets move as they do? Because the universal stuff makes them do so!

At one point, my father went as far as to pay $1,500 to publish a draft of the 
Theory as an advert in the Wall Street Journal. He was convinced that the 
captains of industry – whom my father’s rightwing view led him to believe were 
all highly intelligent men – would beat a path to his door and force the 
blinkered scientific establishment to pay attention to his views. Surprisingly, 
nothing happened.

I suppose this prompts the question, was my father mad? He was certainly 
delusional on the subject of his Theory. And certainly he could be described as 
narcissistic. But he had a successful job, a happy marriage, a beautiful home, 
a large circle of friends – by most criteria, he was a success. Although he 
didn’t make much of a success of parenting.

And so, to fast forward, at 88, in the early stages of dementia, my father was 
still struggling to articulate his Theory. I spent about a week in Hawaii, and 
late in the week, we were watching Murder She Wrote, one of his favourite 
shows. He looked confused and asked what was on. We told him. “Oh,” he said in 
satisfaction, “Murder She Wrote.” These were his last words. He was rushed to 
hospital but to no avail.

I remember going back to his house and, late that night, pouring myself a 
bourbon and talking to Hope, for the first time, about my father. She spoke 
about how happy he had made her and how much they had loved one another. At one 
point I said, “Well, Hope, I don’t suppose we’ll be hearing any more about the 
Theory.”

“Ah, the Theory!” she said, and laughed. And, in the midst of her sadness, 
that laugh conveyed a small sense of relief.
