
1. Across the Andes by motorbike

By Mike Carter

I have a theory that God was a biker. How else to explain South American 
roads? There's a lot of competition for the title of best road trip on the 
continent, but the two-day journey from Iquique on the north Chilean coast to 
Purmamarca in north-west Argentina takes some beating.

You start by barrelling down the Pacific coast road, empty of traffic; just a 
lonely strip of tarmac between the parched Cordillera de la Costa and the 
foaming ocean breakers with dive-bombing pelicans. Benighted shanty towns, 
whose inhabitants come out to wave as you pass, line the shore.

After 100 miles, you head inland, up over the coastal ranges and into the 
Atacama Desert, the driest place on earth. This is the desert of cliché: 
tumbleweed, cacti, vultures, empty, infinite, dangerous, with a sky so blue and 
so vast and so humbling. Pull over to drink this in. I guarantee you will never 
feel smaller, or more alone.

Occasionally, the odd nitrate train trundles past, trailing white mist. On the 
horizon, a soundless puff of smoke, like released spore. Further across the 
altiplano, past the immense long-abandoned mining ghost towns, and the world 
has been bleached - salt flats stretch in every direction until blue and white 
fuse; the light blinding. The apocalypse could look like this.

Overnight in San Pedro de Atacama, a former staging post on the long cattle 
drives, but these days a compulsory staging post for the backpacking gringo. It 
is Dodge City, a Paramount back lot come to life. Next day, after a pre-dawn 
detour to see the El Tatio geysers pop their boiling spumes in synchronised 
celebration the very moment the sun rises over the mountains, head for the Paso 
de Jama. This road climbs from 2,500m to the pass at 4,600m, where little can 
live. If you're on a bike, you will almost freeze to death. Or suffocate from 
the lack of oxygen. But what a way to go, surrounded by the majesty of the High 
Andes.

After the Argentine border, the road drops dramatically, twisting along 
intestinal tracts that wind their way around bald, crumpled hills - green, 
pink, yellow, aquamarine, like some psychedelic Battenberg. Down the final 
descent, the long, sweeping bends making it the finest road I have ever ridden, 
the air rich and syrupy and warm now, passing gauchos on horses and through 
sandstone valleys with rock formations eroded by wind and time into fantastical 
and diabolical shapes. To lovely, remote, dusty Purmamarca, and La Comarca 
hotel (www.lacomarcahotel.com.ar <http://www.lacomarcahotel.com.ar>; 00 54 388 
490 8001), where you find the best llama steaks on the planet. Two days that 
will be with you forever.

·  Mike Carter travelled in South America with GlobeBusters, who offer fully 
guided motorcycle tours of the continent (www.globebusters.com 
<http://www.globebusters.com>; 08452 304015). Mike Carter is the author of 
Uneasy Rider (£10.99, Ebury Press).

2. An Amazon boat trip

By Alex Bellos

Of all the colourful fiestas in South America, a particular favourite of mine 
is the tropical fish festival of Barcelos. The town splits down the middle - 
one half paints itself black and yellow, the colours of a local angelfish, and 
the other half dresses up in red and blue, the colour of the neon cardinal. 
Both sides clash in an all-night extravaganza of music, dance and debauchery.

But Barcelos is difficult to get to. It is in the middle of the Brazilian 
Amazon, not connected by road to anywhere nor served by any airline a European 
traveller would trust. The only way to get there was to sail for 200 miles up 
the Rio Negro from Manaus.

A few travel agencies in Manaus rent boats for bespoke trips. They cater for 
scientists wanting to explore flora and fauna and adventurous tourists. The 
boats offered are mostly wooden craft made in the local style, looking much 
like riverboats of 100 years ago. I would be travelling with a handful of 
friends and we decided on a small one - the Iguana slept six passengers and 
came with a crew of four. The price was very reasonable - about £300 per night 
all-in, working out at £50 per person.

We arrived one evening at Manaus docks and loaded up the Iguana with ice, 
drink and food. We set off upriver, watching the lights of the city disappear 
behind us. When I woke up I looked out of the cabin window. It was one of the 
most mysteriously beautiful sights I have seen. We were in the middle of a 
flooded forest, surrounded by the silvery tips of hundreds of trees. The water 
was still and reflective and there was almost total silence.

Fears that the Amazon would be unbearably hot or irritatingly 
mosquito-infested were unfounded. The Rio Negro is the colour of Coca-Cola 
because of sediment that also deprives the water of oxygen - meaning no insects.

The trip was unforgettable. At sunrise we would take small canoes and go 
birdwatching. In the afternoon we would stop at huge sandbanks, barbecue fish 
we had caught and play Frisbee. Every day we passed maybe a village or two, 
some days we saw nobody. Our cook, Doña Graça, had a kitchen so small she 
barely fitted in it. Yet she made extravagant breakfasts of exotic fruits, 
three-course meals and kept us supplied with a steady stream of caipirinhas. 
Our guide, Gil Serique, spoke fluent English. One night we went out with a 
14-year-old boy who held a torch in his mouth and speared fish from his canoe. 
After about a week we reached Barcelos. The tropical fish festival was noisy 
and chaotic and life-affirming. Yet somehow it didn't live up to the boat 
journey that got us there.

·  To book a bespoke boat trip with guide Gil Serique visit www.youramazon.org 
<http://www.youramazon.org>. Prices depend on length of trip and number of 
people. Alex Bellos is a former South America correspondent for The Observer 
and The Guardian

3. Bolivian bus adventure

By David Atkinson

There are three maxims of any Latin American bus journey. Firstly the driver 
is always drunk; secondly, the seat immediately behind the driver is reserved 
for the best-looking girl on the bus; thirdly, the drunk bus driver will spend 
the entire journey chatting up the best-looking girl on the bus. Drivers are, 
it seems, recruited for their capacity to handle strong liquor and drive at 
high speed without actually ever keeping their eyes on the road.

Yet bus journeys were a big part of my time in South America and I grew to 
love them for their gritty, grass-roots insight into the local culture. In 
Bolivia, riding a route commonly known as 'the world's most dangerous road', a 
moniker bestowed on the 64km downhill track from La Paz to Coroico, was the 
zenith of my bus-riding achievements.

The road descends 3,600m of altitude from the high peaks of Bolivia's 
Cordillera Real to the sub-tropical valleys of the Yungas.

Tour agencies in La Paz arrange white-knuckle mountain-bike trips down its 
length but, for me, the bus was a far more authentic way to sample the 
masochistic frisson of a route that has entered into backpacker folklore.

On a chilly early morning in La Paz, I join a mixed group of locals and 
travellers to take my chances. Having chosen a vehicle that looks halfway 
roadworthy and a driver who looks halfway sober, I pay my 15 Bolivianos one-way 
fare (about £1.20) and settle into a window seat.

A burly man with nicotine-stained teeth is loading hefty bags onto the rusty 
roof rack, while another hustles for customers on the street. When we finally 
start the three-hour trip through the early morning mists, an image of Che 
Guevara beams down upon us from above the driver's seat, while the 
half-shattered rear window bears an effigy of Christ and a sticker with the 
words 'Jesus loves you'. We hope so.

At La Cumbre, just outside La Paz, the driver stops a moment by a roadside 
kiosk to hurl chunks of meat at a pack of snarling hounds and sprinkle alcohol 
across the bus tyres. This ch'alla, or ritual offering, is the age-old means to 
request the protection of Pachamama, the Mother Earth, and appease grumpy 
mountain gods, on the road ahead.

During the next three hours the road changes from tarmac to a rough, dirt 
track. The numerous hairpin bends are lost in the swirling mists until we are 
already on top of them with the back wheels of the bus dangling over the edge 
of a sheer drop-away cliff. No wonder the roadside is littered with stark 
wooden crosses - Bolivian traffic signs, the locals laugh.

The views, however, are spectacular with the landscape shifting dramatically 
as we descend from the barren scrub of the Altiplano to lush, tropical terraces 
of exotic fruit and flowers in Yungas. My destination, Coroico, is a delightful 
Shangri-La of palm trees, banana plantations and mountain scenery. But, 
ultimately, the journey was more rewarding than the arrival.

·  David Atkinson is the author of Bolivia: The Bradt Travel Guide 

4. Jungle hike to El Mirador

By Richard Arghiris

The tropical forest is a place of endless transformations, I realised, 
watching a blue butterfly tangled in a spider's web. Life springs from death, 
and everything devours everything else.

Eight hours of hiking in such ravenous surroundings had left my legs in a 
state of virtual rigor mortis. In the absence of a surgical saw, I was settling 
for an old-fashioned brew of pungent jungle herbs.

'Drink,' rasped Antonio, my guide, pressing a steaming concoction to my chest. 
'Es bueno.'

I took the cup and drank. Soon the incessant forest noises, the shadows, the 
rampant decay and damp-cloaked foliage, all dissolved into a strange, sweet 
drowsiness...

Central America's Petén forest is as thick with intrigue as it is impassable. 
The haunt of drifters, poachers and itinerant criminals, this dark expanse in 
northern Guatemala conceals a network of ancient ruined Mayan cities, all 
obscured by centuries of exuberant growth.

One of the largest and least visited is El Mirador - a vast 2,000 year old 
metropolis separated from the nearest human habitation by 60km of dense jungle. 
It takes two long days and a pair of stout walking boots to reach it.

My journey began in the brightly coloured tourist town of Flores, where I 
jumped into the back of a pickup truck in the 5am twilight. Three talkative 
European travellers were to be my companions.

We headed north until the shuddering end of the road - Carmelita, a diminutive 
hamlet of scratching cockerels and copper coloured dirt tracks. Here we drank 
coffee, chatted and ate a feast of fresh eggs.

Then Antonio, our guide and muleteer, made an impressive entrance on 
horseback, rifle slung over his shoulder and machete at his side.

'Buenos días, caballeros,' he announced, cigarette burning fiercely. Antonio's 
son loaded the mules, who eyed us gloomily under their packs and saddles.

Flanked by matted vegetation, the trail to El Mirador was a convoluted ribbon 
of mud, crossed by innumerable fallen trees, rocks, roots and swarms of 
militant ants. We marched north, mules in tow.

Up in the trees, chattering toucans and gangs of guttural howler monkeys 
observed us. Antonio took the lead, pointing out various medicinal plants, 
hairy tarantulas and bulbous termite nests. His energy was endless. At 
twilight, we reached a ramshackle encampment inhabited by a scruffy, half-drunk 
poacher and his dog. 'I'm chasing wild pigs,' he declared spiritedly. 'And I'm 
having bacon for breakfast!'

We slung our hammocks and cooked up a campfire. That evening we dined on 
turkey stew and drank jungle tea into the night, watching fire-flies and 
swapping stories...

A day later, we finally reached El Mirador and proceeded to the largest 
pyramid in the complex, El Tigre, a monumental giant with a 16,000 sqm base. 
Upon such structures, the ancient Maya would have communed with the gods. We 
grappled to mount it, clinging to roots and vines, pressing upward from one 
crumbling platform to the next. At last we emerged at the pinnacle, high above 
the treetops.

The forest below us was unbroken in every direction, and far in the distance, 
other ruined cities were silhouetted on the horizon. The vast emerald canopy 
had transformed, and now burned a deep red under an immense, hungry sunset.

·  The five day round trip to El Mirador costs around $200 and can be booked 
with various operators in Flores. Richard Arghiris is the co-author of the 
Footprint Guide to Nicaragua. To order a copy at the reduced price of £13.99 
with free UK p&p go toobserver.co.uk/bookshop 
<http://www.observer.co.uk/bookshop> or call 0870 836 0885. The new edition of 
Footprint's South American Handbook is out now priced £22.50. It is available 
at the reduced rate of £20.50 through the Observer Bookshop.

5. Puno to Cuzco by rail

By Tom Robbins

I spent four months travelling through South America, starting in Buenos 
Aires, Argentina, then following the spine of the Andes all the way up through 
Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador and Colombia to reach Caracas in Venezuela. The 
landscapes and cities could scarcely have been more varied - from chic, 
European and rainy Buenos Aires, through the Pampas, the Bolivian deserts, into 
the jungles of the Amazon, then ending up on the sweltering Caribbean coast. 
But at the very heart of the trip was a train ride, a single journey that 
seemed to distill the whole essence of South America into one magical day.

You board the train at 8am at Puno, not in itself much to write home about, 
but as the train slowly eases out of town, the windows on the right reveal one 
of the continent's greatest sights - the vast, shimmering expanse of Lake 
Titicaca. At 3,812m, it's the highest commercially navigable lake in the world 
(not only are there ferries across it, but also ships of the Bolivian navy). 
Sometimes you can't see the far side, sometimes mountain peaks prick the 
distant horizon.

Soon the train is rattling away from the lake and into the scrubby high 
plains, the altiplano. On-board accommodation ranges from the basic 'tourist 
class', which costs around $20 one-way, to the sumptuous first-class carriages, 
for which a ticket costs $143, but includes a three-course lunch in the dining 
car followed by coffee in the open-sided 'observation-bar car'.

The train begins to climb, the vegetation thins, the temperature falls. Before 
long you are passing along the floor of remote valleys, looking across 
stretches of flat grassland to where huge mountains rear up, their hanging 
glaciers and snowfields just visible before the peaks disappear into the 
clouds. For much of the time there's no road nearby, just the railway line, 
unprotected by fences, stretching forward through the wilderness. For hour 
after hour, from the comfort of the train, passengers are treated to the kind 
of scenery you would normally hike for days to reach.

Then occasionally, sitting among the clumps of coarse grass, you see women 
dressed in full Peruvian dress - multicoloured woollen skirts, knitted 
cardigans, shawls and bowler hats - tending to a few alpaca. It's such a 
'classic' South American sight that you can't help but think they have been put 
there for the tourists. But the women aren't manning shops or trinket stalls, 
the train doesn't stop anywhere near them. They are simply going about their 
daily high-altitude lives, unbothered and unchanged by the couple of trains 
which pass each day. You look, lock eyes, wonder at how different your lives 
are, then the train passes on.

At La Raya, the track reaches its highest point, 4,321m, 438m higher than the 
top of Europe's highest cable-car. There is a desolate station where passengers 
pour out to gasp in the thin air, eat piping hot empanadas sold from baskets 
carried on the heads of traders, and buy alpaca-wool hats, before the guard 
corrals everyone back on board.

At 6pm the train rolls into Cuzco. It has taken 10 hours to cover just 238 
miles, but it's one train journey you really don't want to come to an end.

·  See www.perurail.com <http://www.perurail.com> for timetables.

Cycle, raft or ride a horse... more exotic trails to try

Walk Mexico's Copper Canyon

The largest canyon system in the world, Copper Canyon is in the heart of 
Mexico's Sierra Madre mountains and is spectacular hiking territory, following 
the ancient trails of the native Tarahumara. The route begins at the wild west 
town of Urique, and winds through thorn and pine forests, alpine terrain and 
plateaux that offer astonishing vistas across the Cerro Colorado canyon. 
Frontier towns and outposts such as Batopilas and Creel make atmospheric 
overnight locations, and much of the route is in the shade of the dramatic 
canyon walls, making the walking cool and manageable.

·  Walks Worldwide (01524 242000; walksworldwide.com 
<http://www.walksworldwide.com>) has an 11-day fully guided itinerary from 
£2,525pp including flights, transfers and accommodation.

Cycle the Latin American lakes

The Lake District, which straddles the Chile-Argentinian border, is an 
outstandingly beautiful region with quiet roads and gravel tracks perfect for 
cycling. The route from Puerto Montt to Temuco takes in glowering volcanoes, 
immense lakes, snow-capped mountains, swathes of forest and unspoilt villages.

·  Saddle Skedaddle (0191 265 1110; skedaddle.co.uk 
<http://www.skedaddle.co.uk>) has a 15-day itinerary, including accommodation 
and transfers but not flights, from £1,475pp.

Raft the Pacuare River

One of the best ways to see Costa Rica's scenery is from a river, where there 
is little evidence of human presence. The Pacuare river flows through one of 
the region's most impressive canyons, a rare area of natural wilderness that is 
home to monkeys, herons, toucans and blue morpho butterflies. Considered one of 
the best white-water rafting journeys in the world, the route can be done in a 
day.

·  Journey Latin America (020 8747 8315; journeylatinamerica.co.uk 
<http://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk>) offers a one-night rafting excursion as 
part of its Costa Rica itinerary.

Trek Bolivia's Cordillera Real

One of the all-time classic treks - although not for the fainthearted, the 
Cordillera Real is an astonishingly dramatic mountain range with six peaks over 
6,000m. The Real stretches for 120km and trekking from one end to the other 
takes in three mountain passes over 5,000m. The scenery is surprisingly 
diverse: alpine valleys, snow-capped peaks, and little-disturbed Quechua Indian 
villages. All equipment is carried by pack animals.

·  KE Adventure Travel (017687 73966; keadventure.com 
<http://www.keadventure.com>) has an eight-night traverse of the Cordillera 
Real from £1,195pp, excluding international flights but including all meals and 
accommodation.

Horseride the Atacameno Trail, Chile

This spectacular ride follows part of the old route of the local Atacameno 
cowboys who drove livestock from the Argentine Chaco, more than 1,000km away, 
through the San Pedro de Atacama oasis and on to the saltpetre mines in 
northern Chile during the last century. The route passes the edge of the Salar 
de Atacama salt pan, ending at more than 4,000m in the Andes.

·  Equestrian Safaris (00 34 934 069 849; safaririding.com 
<http://www.safaririding.com>) has a seven-day riding and camping trip along 
the route (with two nights in a hotel in San Pedro de Atacama) for US$2,100 per 
person, full board excluding flights.
