
What does my shed say about me?


“I needed more living space, but instead of going for a practical option, I 
chose something that inspires me. It’s my own space and I do all my cooking 
over fire.”

And what it really says

A shed. A Scandi-shed. A Scandi-lady-shed, complete with wood-burning stove. 
There are not many things that would tempt me from my grimy, noisy, squashed, 
city life, but a Scandi-lady-wood-shed is one.

Its appeal is partly fantastical: it looks like a fairytale house, round and 
wooden, with antlers over the central door and sparkly lights in the bushes 
nearby. Really, it should be in the depths of an enchanted forest and Kathryn 
should be a witch, casting spells and eating children, in order to continue her 
marvellous lonely life. But instead, it’s at the bottom of a suburban garden, 
surrounded by houses, not fauns and wolves.

Most sheds belong to a man. A shed is an escape room for him, an extra man 
cave, as he’s effectively handed the rest of the house over to the wife – 
whether or not she wants the bloody thing, with all the cleaning and washing 
and organising it entails, the sorting of the kids. A lady shed is unusual. 
It’s nice that it accommodates Kathryn’s passion, too: she’s a chef, and 
cooking in the shed must be a treat, a world away from making tea at home, yet 
only a few steps from the back door.

Everyday life can be a grind. We all need a special place to run away to, even 
if only in our head. What Kathryn has been lucky and clever enough to do is to 
make her special place real, and close to her normal environment. That’s the 
biggest luxury of the Scandi-lady-wood shed. It’s the dream at the bottom of 
the garden: the fabled, imaginary world that’s mere seconds away. Like the 
wardrobe that leads to Narnia, or the changing room at the back of the shop in
Mr Benn <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mr_Benn>, Kathryn’s shed is utter magic.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
