
There is almost nothing I would rather do than sit around a restaurant table 
with people I like. It's always a thrill, every bit as fizzy as the contents of 
the chilled coupes we've just been upsold. But it's not all bonhomie and 
bubbles: there are things that buzzkill as effectively as a sign that says 
"prop: Gregg Wallace". Here are my worst culprits, the grit in the mussel of 
restaurant-going.

Tipping and double tipping

The bill has had its 12.5% duly levied, but the card machine starts hectoring 
you for more cash like a crusty with a dog on a string. There is a school of 
thought that says you should bung a tenner on top of service if you've been 
properly schmoozed, but with a meal for two in London routinely costing well 
over a ton, I fret that if I do they'll think I haven't spotted the charge and 
undertipped.

No matter how often I eat out, tipping remains a minefield. I like it when 
service isn't included: I sing hallelujah and tip properly. Alas, there are way 
too many who don't: when I worked in restaurants, people would sometimes 
furtively cache a 50p coin under their saucers. My tactic was to run after them 
bellowing: "Excuse me, sir, you've left your bus fare on the table." These days 
I pay the service charge, hope and pray it gets to the staff and scuttle off 
into the night, suffused with some vague sense of guilt and shame.

No reservations

Yes, I know all about the financial imperatives behind this, the necessity for 
businesses to keep the tills ringing in the face of recession. And I'm aware 
that for some there's nothing sexier than a long, hot, hard queueing session. 
But it's not for me: the idea that I might not end up with a table at my chosen 
restaurant fills me with a nameless, black panic. I've been known to sidle into 
the likes ofSpuntino <http://www.spuntino.co.uk/> or Pitt Cue Co 
<http://www.pittcue.co.uk/home/> at unpopular hours, noon or 10.30 at night, 
but this is evidence of solitary vice rather than sociable interaction. Stop 
muttering "get a life" at the back there, and hashtagging #firstworldproblems. 
Thisis my life.

Waiters who act like your best pal

"Hey guys, how you doin'?" beams our new best pal, as though he were Joey from 
the Lower East Side rather than Jeremy from Swindon. He hunkers, comfy-like. 
There is no evidence of an order pad or new techno thingie on which to commit 
our order. All of which makes me want to hurtle, screaming, straight to the 
nearest chippie.

Nobody admires front-of-house practitioners more than I do, but when I'm with 
my actual friends, I don't need a new, temporary one for the evening. I do not 
want to be called "laydeez" or be told that the pudding course is "what you've 
been waiting for". I really do not want to be led to the actual Ladies and have 
the door held open for me with a knowing grin. Once, inBabylon 
<http://www.roofgardens.virgin.com/>, Kensington (now owned by Richard 
Branson), the waiter ushered me into the Gents to show me a kind of peephole 
into the Ladies. While I'm assured it's no longer there, there is such a thing 
as being overserved.

Wineglass-filling fascism

There are restaurants where they deliberately leave your wine at a remove from 
the table so you have no control over your booze intake. Just typing that sends 
a chill through my marrow: an empty glass during dinner dismays almost as much 
as begging to have it filled. But worse is one that's relentlessly topped up, a 
waiter or sommelier permanently at your elbow, destroying anecdotes and 
galumphing over confidences. To your horror, you discover that the bottle is 
magically empty and you've only just finished your starters. You order another 
bottle, trying not to think about the already stratospheric bill. Top relaxing 
evening guaranteed.

Restaurant websites

These are almost universally awful: clubby music, "clever" flash animation 
("please wait while we load" … Next!), the chef's "philosophy", stock 
photography of random food and a lot of waffling about seasonal and local 
gleaned from watching Gordon's Kitchen Nightmares. Even worse are those 
designed for Continental Big Names whose idea of fun is making you chase the 
cursor around a tableau of dancing hams. All I is want is the menu with prices, 
maybe some nice photos of the interior, opening hours and contact details. How 
hard can it be? Almost impossible, apparently.

A nice chat with the chef

When I see the chef looming over to my table, I do not think, "Goody – here's 
a chap who will love to hear my constructive overview of his cooking," and 
settle in for a nice tête-à-tête. Unless you're prepared to toe the party line 
of everything's-bloody-marvellous-you're-a-genius-how-do-you-do-it?, chefs are 
not interested in your feedback. Try telling them that the duck was overcooked, 
the chips tasted frozen and the asparagus wasn't local. Go on, I dare you.

'High concept'

An email arrives announcing a new "free-range chicken and egg" restaurant. 
Menu items include the Bangkok scotch egg made with minced thigh meat and Thai 
herbs. There's a risotto scotch egg too. I'm not making this up. I long to try 
these dishes almost as much as I long to swallow my own tongue.

Here are words to strike fear into any food-obsessed heart: "Prezzo opens 
chicken, burgers and rib concept,Cleaver <http://www.loveprezzo.co.uk/>." That 
is like telling hardcore musos that the new act is a Bieber-Swift mashup with 
topnotes of Perry. Or how aboutTanner & Co <http://tannerandco.co.uk/> in 
Bermondsey, which imagines we'd like to eat our dinner in an environment 
designed to reference school gymnasiums? School gyms only make me think of 
sweat and despair, not all of it mine.

These are "concept" restaurants, only ever the work of gym-conditioned Justin 
and almost-anorexic Amanda in the "ideas room" of a catering conglomerate; 
Apprentice candidates who have somehow escaped into the real world. People who 
love food and enjoy restaurants don't open "concepts". Nor should we eat in 
them.

Tasting menus of more than 12 courses

I have never finished one of these things sober. By course nine or so, it's 
all gone blurry. Because, believe me, you need that Elysium muscat to help ram 
down the artichoke and foraged elderberry caramelised earth. These menus are 
all about the chef. For the diner, they're not about pleasure, they're about 
macho endurance – yes, even for the gals. It's wallet-flexing, every bit as 
subtle as driving up in a liveried Ferrari wearing head-to-toe Burberry check. 
Multiple-course aficionados consider themselves way superior to someone 
stuffing themselves with 97 hotdogs. But by the time you're nibbling course 11, 
even if it is eel-skin crackers with cherry-smoked backfat, it still amounts to 
eating as a competitive sport.

'That table is booked'

This is my very favourite. So I've studied the hotshot new openings and booked 
at the first portentous "booking lines now open" tweet, pecking at my phone 
like a demented budgie. And still I'm led to the worst table in the house, the 
one facing into a corner or squashed next to the lavs. As I point tentatively 
to an empty table in a part of the restaurant that doesn't scream "Hahaha 
Siberia you loser", the reply comes: "I'm sorry, madam, that table is booked."

It makes me shrieky. How is it booked, how? Who are these people so clued-up 
that they not only book before anyone even knows it's open, they can specify an 
actual table?

Of course, the truth isn't "that table is booked", but "we're keeping it for 
someone better designed to exemplify the brand values of our new white-hot 
establishment, someone with tattoos, a beard and an artisan salami company. Or 
some hedge-funders.'"

77%* of restaurants outside major cities

The menu riddled with "jus" and "medley" and "symphony of"; the crescent moon 
side dishes of mangetout and baby corn; the salad bristling with raw green 
pepper; those high-backed leather dining chairs you find in the back pages of 
Restaurant magazine; the staff who have no idea what they're serving. Yep, 
we're in the provinces. And before you rage and froth and call me all kinds of 
obnoxious scenester consumerist chimpanzee, I too live in Not London, where I 
routinely put up with crooked-pinkie culinary pretentions – tomatoes carved 
into roses, "fennel and gnocchi salad" (truly), crabmeat packed into a lovely 
plastic crabshell, or, if the chef has ambitions, a dome of smoke over 
something that once tasted of fish – because there is little alternative. And 
that's before I start to rant about "food service" companies that knock up that 
lovely boeuf bourguignon in faceless industrial estate kitchens. No, I don't 
mean you, you 23%* who are brilliant, who bake all your own bread and pay your 
staff properly. But if you're looking for me, I'll be on the train to the Smoke.

*Statistics do not stand up to scientific scrutiny.

'The table is yours for a two-hour timeslot'

Aka table-turning. No, ta. Ta-ta.
