
I am writing after returning from a week’s holiday with my son, his partner 
and their two children, who are both under five.

I have been concerned for several years that their management of their 
children’s sleep and meals is chaotic, causing all four of them a great deal of 
distress. Having recently seen it under the same roof, I am at my wit’s end to 
know how to help them or how best to cope myself. I know holidays are stressful 
but their daily routines were already very fragile.

There was a scene on holiday when both children refused to eat their high tea, 
my son exploded with rage, some china smashed on the floor, the children howled 
and their mother took them away to bed where they all immediately fell asleep. 
It was disturbing to witness and afterwards I absented myself from earshot of 
their mealtimes. I get very tense just watching their mother offer them large 
pieces of chocolate shortbread and/or large quantities of milk within an hour 
or less of their high tea.

Both children still drink large quantities of milk first thing in the morning 
before breakfast, before bedtime and mid-afternoon. They have to be coaxed to 
eat solid food at breakfast, are given snacks all morning, pick at lunch, and 
then there are further crisps, chocolate, cake and milk in the afternoon. They 
are given their main meal at 5pm, which is mostly thrown away.

I am wary of trying to talk to my son – he has been dismissive of mild 
comments I have made in the past, and I have a polite but distant relationship 
with his partner. I do not know how to help without provoking a breakdown in my 
relationship with them but feel I ought to do something more constructive than 
arranging to absent myself from mealtimes. I love my grandchildren dearly and 
get on well with them.

Both adults are very sleep-deprived and my son has a demanding job. He is 
irritable, surly and subject to temper outbursts when frustrated with the 
children. His partner is more placid but also falls asleep at odd times, 
leaving my son to cope. They seem stuck.

The children are clean and healthy and their parents intelligent and otherwise 
competent.

How can I help my son handle his frustrations and negotiate small changes (not 
the enormous task of reforming their whole regime) and how should I accomplish 
this for myself?

It’s immensely frustrating seeing people making life more difficult for 
themselves, especially when they do the same thing over and over again. I agree 
that giving unhealthy snacks before a meal every day seems like insanity. But 
sometimes people do that when they are seeking short-term solutions to problems 
they are too exhausted to deal with.

I’m sure you remember how tiring being a parent is, especially in those early 
years when sleep deprivation can be really acute and you’re finding your feet. 
You often can’t see the wood for the trees and lose perspective: you simply 
don’t see that changes to the way you handle things might change outcomes. It 
does take a brave person to say “maybe you need to do this differently” and the 
advice, though well meant, is hardly ever well received when from a family 
member.

So, even if you were bold and said “don’t give the children huge snacks before 
dinner”, it wouldn’t make it happen. Being on holiday is a weird set up anyway 
– is it indicative of how it is in their everyday life, do you think?

Deirdre Dowling, a child and adult psychotherapist who has worked extensively 
with children (childpsychotherapy.org.uk <http://www.childpsychotherapy.org.uk/>
), says: “Under-fives are full of difficult, powerful feelings – we can almost 
forget what it was like.” She feels the key may be if you can give practical 
support. “Lower your expectations and offer [your son and his wife] practical 
support.

“No one can think when they’re emotional and no one can survive without sleep. 
Could you offer to look after the children for a weekend, say, to give your son 
and daughter-in-law a break? Are you worried about your son?”

If you are – beyond the children’s routines – could you spend a bit of one on 
one time with him? It doesn’t have to be for very long, and you shouldn’t try 
to prise open how he feels. But if he feels connected with you – safer – he may 
open up a bit more. Does your daughter-in-law have her mother around? I agree 
that your son seems highly strung but your daughter-in-law may well be 
depressed.

I think the way forward is to support the parents as best you can to enable 
them to parent to the best of their ability. Concentrate not on the children’s 
routines or lack of bedtimes, but on your son and his wife.

If things get heated and frantic, don’t sit there in silence, don’t absent 
yourself from the room – these responses can come across as judgmental and 
uncaring. Instead, say, “How can I help?” That is a great phrase: kind, 
empowering, helpful and it puts the parent in charge with you as ancillary. You 
may also be really surprised at the response.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
