
Start with a simple fact. A hundred professional fact-checkers from 41 
countries gathered in Buenos Aires last week for a great International 
Fact-Checking Network convention. Now a question: why were they sunning 
themselves in Argentina when we needed them here, urgently, to guide us through 
a swamp of spin and sleazy mendacity?

Of course this referendum is high-stakes stuff. Give us the facts, bemused 
voters repeatedly plead: assuming that, in forecasting world, there are any 
facts, as opposed to likelihoods based on reasonable assumptions sanctified by 
“experts” of various distinction. But this doesn’t mean there isn’t plenty of 
factual stuff left to check. That supposed £350m a week Leave says goes to 
Brussels. That “Turkey is joining the EU” poster. And yes, the Remain lot 
haven’t always been pristine either.

So what are the facts and where are the checkers? They exist all right: in 
some newspapers, fromFull Fact <https://fullfact.org/> on the web (scoring hits 
on theMail and the Telegraph last week), from Channel 4 News on TV and screen. 
But do they have the impact they need to keep the politicians in check?

If facts matter, they have to be bruited loud in a way that compels attention 
and settles the argument: which means on television as well as the web. But – 
with due obeisances toC4 News – this is a pretty undeveloped area. The Poynter 
Institute can find only three TV-led fact-checking operations worldwide: and 
the one that makes the clearest impact – in the teeth of another Spanish 
general election – is the Pruebas (testing) section of Channel Six’sEl Objetivo 
programme run by the redoubtable Ana Pastor.

This is relentless checking, tailored for television. You watch videos of 
ministers or their opponents reciting a fib, cross-cutting back and forth: then 
you find the true figuring laid out clear as day. No ducking or weaving. It’s a 
regular, biting reproach to the phoney £350m challenge, one theBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> could provide in a trice (if rigorous 
public service and hard facts really go together, that is).

But see, then, how one pristine thing gets in the way of another. Sarah 
Wollaston MP, the health committee chairwho was a Leaver till the rubbish about 
that £350m turned her stomach 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
, made the point openly on theToday show. She’d long protested to Leave 
campaigners that the figure was a dud, but they’d told her that was fine by 
them: peddling calculated garbage got you an extra BBC slot for rebuttal under 
fairness and balance rules.

And lo! the calculated ploy worked yet again. There was Wollaston, leaving in 
disgust on the 7am news. And there was John Redwood, under F and B guidelines, 
instantly on tap to explain why the lie was really a sort of truth. Repetition 
is the name of the game. The first two Leavers up in the ITV debate solemnly 
recited the £350m mantra for obvious purposes: tell a porky and the next 
sausage comes free.

Your private polls show you what resonates and this is an attested way of 
getting those core messages across – “cynical but effective”, as the 
influential founder of ConservativeHome, Tim Montgomerie, said the other day.
Todaypresenter Sarah Montague sounded taken aback when Wollaston explained this 
to her – which seemed somewhat naive in the circumstances.

Rebuttal isn’t fact-checking. Rebuttal is also another opportunity to 
refurbish a deliberate untruth: which is why, so far, BBC sifting of facts from 
fibs has been rather spotty and feeble. So let the TV checking be upfront, on 
screen and definitive. Let one resounding correction end the debate. Stop slime 
in its tracks. Take moral control and make truth sovereign again.
