
My husband and I don’t want to have kids. And that’s OK. That might change, 
but right now we’re happy with the way things are and want to keep them that 
way. You disagree. Quite vehemently. Disagreement between us is nothing new – 
we disagree on a lot of things and that’s OK. What’s not OK, however, is being 
disrespectful of our decisions.

I understand that your constant challenges towards this particular decision 
come from a good place. I really do. But what you want for us isn’t necessarily 
what we want for ourselves.

I’ve never really been into kids, you know that. While other little girls 
loved to feed, change and nurture their plastic dollies, I was elsewhere, 
playing dress-up and make-believe. I was more interested in being a kid than 
pretending to look after one. Despite your predictions, nothing changed as I 
grew older. I didn’t want to babysit the neighbours’ kids and I only managed to 
stick teaching for a year before quitting because I was exhausted all the time.

You used to shrug off my disinterest by saying that I’d grow out of it, that 
I’d just wake up one day and wouldn’t just want a baby, I’dneed one. But as the 
years have gone by and my biological clock has continued to tick along without 
the slightest hint of alarm, you have changed tack. Unable to accept that our 
choice is because of our fundamental lack of interest in parenting, you have 
started to accuse me of wilfully denying myself a baby as a way of rebelling 
against society. And, of course, my mother-in law.

I suppose you imagine us bonding over motherhood, but children aren’t the 
answer to broken relationships

I freely admit that I find my mother-in-law irritating but what you accuse me 
of is not only ridiculous, it’s quite unkind.

Our decision to remain childfree wasn’t made lightly; it was painstaking and 
deliberate. I’ve spent hours thinking about whether we should have kids or not 
– weighing up the pros and cons, envisioning life in each scenario and 
listening to our friends’ experiences. But the answer has always remained: 
Kids? No, thank you.

I know that’s hard for you to understand. I know you desperately want 
grandkids and I think that is partly because our relationship is distant. You 
want to repair the damage you did when you left Dad for your boyfriend, and to 
have a closer relationship with me. I suppose you imagine us bonding over the 
trials of motherhood and through the sharing of your parenting experiences and 
knowledge. But children aren’t the answer to broken relationships, you know 
that.

When I was a kid, you were a great mum, kind and caring, always so patient. 
But being a good parent means that at some point, you need to acknowledge that 
your child has become an adult. And as such, has the right to make their own 
decisions, even if you disagree with them. That’s all I’m asking you to do. I’m 
asking you to be a good parent and to treat us as your equals; I’m asking you, 
very nicely, to stop the eye rolling and raised voices, to stop the snide jabs 
and sad looks, and start demonstrating your love and affection by trying to 
accept and support our decisions, rather than trying to change them.

Sincerely, Your loving daughter
