
For me, an egg is just right when the yolk is warm and runny, wrapped in a 
blanket of egg white that is just set. When the white’s not mucus-like (which 
means it’s not cooked) and not hard, it’s silken and melts in your mouth. Which 
is why the best way to boil an egg is not to boil it. The problem is that the 
white sets at a lower temperature than the yolk so, when you cook the egg 
traditionally in boiling water, the white becomes rubbery.

People say science takes the emotion out of cooking, but if you understand how 
ingredients work, you have greater control over them. It’s all about time and 
temperature. I read about the physicist Nicholas Kurti, who cooked an egg at 
64°C for hours and created this version. I experimented, using a water bath. 
After 45 minutes, the white is a gel and the yolk a paste. It’s almost as 
though the yolk and the white swap textures, and it tastes fantastic on a 
crumpet!

After relentless trials, here is my formula for the perfect boiled egg:
 Step 1. Illustration: Son of Alan/Guardian 
1. Take a small saucepan with a glass lid and carefully place a single egg (or 
two, or three) inside it. Burford brown eggs have a nice orange yolk. Fill the 
pan so the water only just covers the eggs – not even a millimetre more. If you 
had a centimetre of water covering the egg then you could still get the same 
result, but you’d have to play with the timing.
 Step 2. Illustration: Son of Alan/Guardian 
2. Put the pan on maximum heat with the lid on and bring to the boil.
 Step 3. Illustration: Son of Alan/Guardian 
3. As soon as the water starts to bubble, remove from the heat. As you take 
the pan off, set a timer for six minutes; keep the lid on. Make sure you time 
it exactly, and you’ll end up with the perfect egg.


As told to Rosanna Greenstreet

Historic Heston, by Heston Blumenthal 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/hestonblumenthal> is out now 
(Bloomsbury, £40, hardback)

Is there a simple task you’d like to perfect? Email 
do.something@theguardian.com with your suggestion

