
Rounded, clipped evergreen shrubs including Euonymus japonicus, box and holly 
are repeated throughout, and the different sizes and leaf shapes prevent the 
look becoming too regimented.

The gravel terrace is suitable for informal plantings of perennials and 
grasses, including Alchemilla mollis and Stipa tenuissima which happily 
self-seed into the loose surface.

The lawn introduces space into the heart of the garden and allows the 
surrounding plants to be seen more clearly.

As in a typical country- or cottage-style garden, there is no specific colour 
scheme, but bright red, magenta and burgundy provide a dramatic contrast with 
the other plants.

The addition of Mediterranean plants to the terrace, including thyme and 
bearded iris, mixed with a smattering of hot colours, evokes a warm, dry 
atmosphere.

Current garden design law seems to dictate that, when faced with a blank piece 
of paper, the designer immediately divides the space up into a series of rooms. 
This approach can be hugely successful but also runs the risk of delivering a 
series of disjointed spaces that serve only to make the garden feel cramped.

Judith Glover, an illustrator, has managed to divide her north London garden 
so that each part is not only connected visually to the others but shares 
common characteristics, so they all remain part of the whole.

A small timber deck projects from the back of the house and lands on a raised 
gravel terrace planted with self-seeding grasses and perennials including Stipa 
tenuissima, Erigeron karvinskianus and Verbena bonariensis. The backdrop of 
shrubs and taller perennials divides the terrace from the lawned area beyond, 
which is partly shaded and fringed by woodland planting. Catching glimpses of 
the cool, tranquil lawn from the hotter, exposed part of the garden draws 
people into its heart. The two areas have quite different atmospheres, yet they 
share common planting that binds them together. This repetition of country 
garden favourites and solid clipped shrubs enhances the feeling of space rather 
than making the garden feel cluttered (judithglover.com 
<http://www.judithglover.com>).
