
At Faro airport there's a scrum of resort reps ready to meet and greet new 
arrivals. In an hour or so they'll be hitting their charges with the usual 
options: Do you want to play golf? Go go-karting? Cycle through mountains? Be 
dragged around important museums and art galleries?

No, not me thanks. I want to kick back and do sweet nothing. In fact, I want a 
place where the locals have elevated doing not much to an art form. So, instead 
of turning left to the all-in, attraction-rich resorts, I catch a cab for the 
15 minutes to Olhão.

Pronounced "oll-yow", Olhão is the Algarve's largest fishing port. A rare gem, 
its centre is crumbling, charming, faded, and stuffed full of appealingly batty 
characters. The occasional tourist wanders about, wondering quite why they're 
here. Olhão is a top place for a relaxing long weekend. I'm intent on being 
inert, but rouse myself sufficiently to discover that the jewel in its crown 
isn't actually in town, but a lovely ferry ride away.

Ria Formosa is an estuarine national park, with Olhão at its mouth and the 
wild Atlantic beyond. Around 80% of Portugal's clams are fished here, around 
its four low islands. Farol and Armona are where Lisbon folk maintain their 
holiday homes; Deserta is a sandy empty place for the Robinson Crusoe in you; 
Culatra is where the fishermen live, and they are delighted for you to be as 
active as you wish, as long as that includes watching the waves, counting your 
toes, playing dominoes, drinking cold drinks, and eating delicious fish.

There are four sailings a day to Culatra, and a return trip on the Rio Bello 
costs the price of a beer in an Algarve resort. Battalions of tartan shopping 
trollies bursting with green vegetables and juicy fruits from Olhão's markets 
are lashed to Rio Bello's blue-washed funnel, and we're off. The ferries are 
operated by men of a certain age who leap hither and thither, offering twinkly 
chivalrous winks to the ladies aboard. Though Culatra's only a mile or so 
offshore, we sail the long way over to avoid sandbanks and shrimp nets. The air 
smells clean and salty, families natter about everything and nothing, lapdogs 
snap, an earnest student sketches another earnest student, young lovers gently 
snog and strangers strike up friendships.

Culatra feels like the start of a love affair right from the moment we nudge 
alongside its long slender jetty. I amble along the sandy concrete path towards 
Café Janoca, past the stout whitewashed chapel and the rusty anchor outside it. 
A table of fishermen plays noisy dominoes next to a family of quiet pale 
newly-arrived townies; when I pass again four hours later, the family are still 
there, only now playing dominoes with the fishermen and laughing like drains.

Ten steps on, next to Rui's cafe, there's a grocery where you buy everything 
you need for a perfect picnic. It's hot outside, and the light is the intense, 
saturated light you find only on islands, so I drain a couple of long cold 
Sagres beers in Rui's. Rui has a long covered terrace where I sit with more 
fishermen, all of whose faces are tanned as your mum's old handbag; one of them 
actually smokes a pipe and has an anchor tattooed on his bicep. They have 
buckets and trowels as they're going clamming, and Popeye leaves first, 
navigating the sand with a gratifyingly bandy gait.

Save a few tractors for dragging boats up the beach, there are no motor 
vehicles on Culatra. There are no roads either, so I walk the sandy path into 
the settlement's cluster of low-built houses and cottages. About 700 people 
live here year round. Their homes are huddled close to each other and at first 
sight, appear unremarkable. Up close, I see that the Culatrans coax exquisite 
gardens out of the sand with wildflowers, succulents, shell patterns and mad 
blushes of bougainvillea. Old fishing nets and briny ropes enclose the gardens, 
and lines of washing flap in the Atlantic breeze.

Towards the end of the settlement is the spotless yellow Casa Marina, which 
Senhora Lidia rents out by the fortnight. Rooms and other houses to rent on the 
island are available informally through Cafes Rui and Janoca. The houses soon 
give way to dunes crowned with clumps of wild chamomile, and a new boardwalk, 
which leads over a low lagoon.

The boardwalk deposits me on a beach so long that its edges are lost in heat 
haze shimmer. The beach is wide, clean and empty: it is May Day holiday 
weekend, and there are 11 people on it, including me, and I'm the only one not 
lying flat on my back. Instead, I get a healthy blast of ocean ozone, a rush of 
blood to the head and lope off to the left, deciding vaguely to circumnavigate 
the island.

The sun shouts down from a sapphire sky clotted with three tiny cottony 
clouds. The sand scintillates in the bright island light and, coolly tonic on 
my hot feet, the Atlantic sparkles like chainmail. There are well-fed seagulls 
wheeling above and wagtails dipping their beaks where the rippled water 
recedes. There are no nasty oil-marks on the beach, nor weedy sewage outfalls. 
There are no Fantas or Magnums on ice, no sellers of souvenirs, no racks of 
postcards, no loutish boomboxes, no plastic rubbish, no deckchairs for rent, no 
jet-skis to annoy me, no windsurfing lessons not to take. For ages there is 
nobody but me, alone with my thoughts, which have slowed down with the rhythm 
of the sea.

I'm joined at a distance by four fishermen. They are waist deep in the water, 
harnessed by yellow straps to box nets that they wiggle backwards through the 
sandy shallows in search of cockles. A sailboat tacks over the horizon and, 
after an hour or so of fast walking, I'm at one end of the beach. Every now and 
again, a jet glides high overhead with its pink cargo of resort-bound action 
seekers. The way back around the other side of the island to the settlement is 
even emptier, save for a dozen clam diggers in the distance, bent like question 
marks over the sand.

I lope into Café Rui and in a trice they've laid me a place and grilled me 
some fat small sardines, and found a handful of small squid, which they fry in 
good oil with cloves of golden garlic. These arrive with a sharp salad of sweet 
tomatoes and crunchy onion. Time being elastic on Culatra, lunch lasts long 
enough for me to floor plenty of chilly vinho verde and to make friends with 
just about everyone on the terrace. Jorge, the island's plumber, fado singer 
and domino maestro explains the insular philosophy to tourism. "There's no 
'them' and 'us' here", he says: "You are on Culatra. So am I. We are the same". 
I badly want to rent a place here. And possibly never leave.

Instead, and having missed the ferry, I join some other dreamers to share a 
speedboat water taxi back to the mainland. We pay €5 each and fall into the 7 
Estrellas bar (Travesa Alexandre Herculano, opposite the meat market), where 
small tumblers of excellent wine from the cask are 30 cents a throw. We're 
joined by one of the town barbers, who paints beautiful watercolours between 
punters. A shirtless man walks past, braying like a donkey. "You think he's 
crazy?" asks our barber/painter: "His brother the mayor is madder."

Olhão is home to many a nutty enthusiast. Some come from outside, drawn by the 
abandoned, gloriously tile-fronted, 19th-century townhouses which are yours for 
a song. One, a velvet-slippered, part-English dandy, owns 15 such properties, 
and can't bear to touch any of them. Some come from here and spend their days 
eating snails and clams, and talking hilarious philosophical rot for each 
other's gentle entertainment. The mayor has established a zoo on the prettily 
gardened seafront. And stocked it entirely with terrapins.

The most stylish Olhãonense are architects Filipe Monteiro and Eleonore 
Lefebure. I stay with them at White Terraces, their super-cool, sensitively 
restored townhouses, and feel like Herbert flipping Ypma from Hip Hotels. 
Filipe and Eleonore take me for a meander through the old medina barrio, where 
alleys double-back on each other, where the sun-and time-faded walls could have 
been painted by Mark Rothko, where the smell of sardines grilling outside is 
narcotic, where the air resounds to endless "bom dias" and church bells.

They also take me to La Taxca (Rua Correio Olhãoense, opposite the fish 
market) a tiny, tiled joint where - if Fernando likes the look of you - he'll 
feed you until you beg for mercy with simply sumptuous home-cooked grub. Some 
poshies from Lisbon come in, demanding a table. Fernando doesn't want their 
type here. "This looks like a restaurant" explains our flush faced host, "But 
if you want to eat here, you must bring your own food." Cue general confusion, 
hilarity among the rest of us, and carafes of wine on the house. The spirit of 
generosity that pervades La Taxca is matched only by Fernando's personal intake 
of overproof almond aguadiente.

Leaving Olhão and Culatra was the most difficult thing I did in all my days 
there. Getting the best out of the town and its island heaven requires 
dedication only to the art of idling. People-watching, navel-gazing, and gentle 
meandering are all that are really required of you, and doing so little 
actually allows you to find yourself too. When you visit you'll probably find 
me back in the 7 Estrellas, discussing the finer points of terrapin keeping, 
spending lazy days on Culatra's beaches, and my nights on Olhão's tiles.

Way to go

Getting there

Monarch (08700 40 50 40, monarch.co.uk <http://www.monarch.co.uk>) flies to 
Faro from Birmingham, Gatwick, Luton (summer season only) and Manchester from 
£86 rtn inc taxes. A taxi from Faro airport to Olhão costs around €25, or take 
the bus to Faro, then train to Olhão every 30 minutes, €1 one way. The Ferry 
from Olhão to Culatra costs €3.40 rtn; water taxi €25 one-way.

Where to stay

In Culatra, Senhora Lidia rents Casa Marina (00351 914 983 619, she speaks 
some Spanish) for €500-750 per fortnight (sleeps 4).Ownersdirect.co.uk 
<http://www.ownersdirect.co.uk> also offers accommodation on the islands. Café 
Rui (+962 508 746) can also help find rooms and houses to rent. In Olhão, White 
Terraces (+289 119 616, whiteterraces.com) has five sensational townhouses from 
€40-€130 per day, or €225-€850 per week, depending on the size of property and 
season.
