
I have been with my boyfriend for six years. We met at university and have 
tried living together in his hometown twice. We recently went travelling 
together and, on returning to the UK, we moved to a city that was between our 
two hometowns. As a couple, we got on well but neither of us managed to 
integrate wholeheartedly. I was hurt when he told me he was accepting a job 
back home without consulting me – he would be commuting three hours each day.

Just after this decision, I found out I was pregnant. It was a shock and his 
immediate reaction was to “get rid of it”. I felt completely on my own and cut 
off from my support network, and so, with regret, we came to the unimaginable 
decision to terminate.

I decided that if we terminated the pregnancy there would be no reason to stay 
together. Some days I am overwhelmed with regret; it was a choice made out of 
panic and not feeling certain that our relationship was stable. Yet, despite 
this ordeal, I wasn’t strong enough walk away and have followed him back to his 
home. In the past few months I have learned that his younger brother and fiance 
are expecting their first baby, which, I am ashamed to admit, causes me pain. 
Their relationship is an emblem of everything our relationship isn’t. I 
question why we’re not engaged and with our baby. Everything has been an upward 
struggle and I know the relationship is toxic, yet I feel unable to leave.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email: 
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto:private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
