
From the first autumn chills, to the first real heat of late spring, Testaccio 
market, like all Roman markets, is a place for artichoke lovers. The slim, 
thorny ones from Sardinia arrive first. Next the pear-shaped ones from Puglia 
and Sicily, then finally, in early spring, huge, majesticcarciofi romaneschi 
(Roman artichokes), which also come from Sicily (my Sicilian partner likes to 
remind me). On spring Saturdays, a man sits trimming artichokes in the middle 
of Testaccio market. It is a hypnotic whittle: a swift, circular trim with a 
small curved knife, that transforms each globe from a formidable 
purple-armoured beauty into a vulnerable pale tulip. Speed with the knife is 
matched by speed with a lemon half, which is rubbed on the cut surfaces to stop 
them going black.

Initially, I found this trim a bit of a shock, a short back and sides to a 
mane of hair. As far as I was concerned, artichokes – when I found them – were 
to be admired, boiled whole, and admired again. Then the leaves would be pulled 
off one by one, dipped in melted butter, and the flesh from the bottom of each 
leaf scraped with the back of my bottom teeth. I still like a scrape from time 
to time, but I have come to love the whittle that leaves a sea of leaves in the 
kitchen. What takes the man about 30 seconds, takes me about three times as 
long, with a lot less style. You take off everything inedible so that the 
entire trimmed artichoke can be cooked.

An abundance of artichokes means an abundance of ways to cook them. Once 
trimmed, Romans stuff artichokes with garlic and mint and braise the stems 
until soft and velvety. They also splay them out and fry them until they 
resemble a bronze chrysanthemum that can be eaten, crisp leaf by crisp leaf, 
until you reach the soft heart. Artichokes are braised to eat with pasta, baked 
with breadcrumbs and layered into lasagna. Best of all though, is the moment 
when late artichokes are joined at the market by the first peas, broad beans 
and lettuce and made into a quintessential Roman spring vegetable stew called
vignarola.

There are as many versions and strong opinions about how to make vingnarola as 
there are cooks to make it. I also spend a fair bit of time in Sicily, where 
their similar spring stew,fritteda, also warrants plenty of advice. Inspired by 
the versions I liked, I have practised and have madevignarola my own. I don’t 
include cured pork, although it is very nice, and rather than putting 
everything in the pan at once I prefer a stagger of ingredients, which ensures 
each one gets the right amount of time.

Related: Rachel Roddy’s anchovy stuffed roast lamb recipe | A Kitchen in Rome 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/12/rachel-roddys-anchovy-and-garlic-stuffed-roast-lamb-recipe>

The foundation is important, cooking the onion slowly in plenty of good olive 
oil, so as to bring out the sweetness, followed by the artichoke wedges. Stir 
and add wine or water and cover the pan for a while. This is important, as it 
creates a steamy braise. Once the artichokes are just tender, you add the peas 
and broad beans, which only need a few minutes – keep tasting. If you have 
decided to double peel the broad beans, you might add them after the peas, as 
they only need a lick of heat. The final dish should be a tumble of soft onion, 
tender artichokes and broad beans, and peas just cooked, but still bursting in 
your mouth. There should be sweet, oily juices. The mint is added at the end, 
the residual heat bringing out its grumpy, but lovely, flavour.

As well as being a delicious thing to eat, vignarola celebrates a useful 
principle: vegetables braised in oil and their own juices to bring out the best 
in them. A useful principle that lends itself to variations; variations on 
vignorola, if you like. When I can’t find artichokes, I cook lots of sweet 
onions, then add peas and broad beans (frozen if needs be). I have added 
asparagus, endives, chard and quartered little gem lettuce, which makes a 
brilliant sidekick forlast weeks’ roast lamb 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/12/rachel-roddys-anchovy-and-garlic-stuffed-roast-lamb-recipe>
; the intention is for this column to feel like a set of recipes that fit 
together. I have topped vignarola with crispy bacon, toasted breadcrumbs and 
ricotta, stirred it into pasta and new potatoes, even piled on garlic-rubbed 
toast.

However you serve it, and wherever you may be, it is a dish that celebrates 
spring and her glorious vegetables.

Vignarola (Roman spring vegetable stew)

Serves 4
1 lemon, to acidulate the water
3 large artichokes
1kg peas in their pods (about 300g shelled peas)
1 kg fave in their pods (about 300g shelled broad beans)
1 large white onion or 8 spring onions
6 tbsp olive oil
Salt
200ml of white wine (or water)
A sprig of fresh mint

1 Cut the lemon in two, squeeze the juice in a big bowl of water, then rub 
your hands with empty halves. Prepare the artichokes by first pulling away the 
darker tougher leaves, pulling them down towards the base of the artichoke and 
snapping them off just before the base. Then, using a sharp knife, pare away 
the tough green flesh from the base of the artichokes and the stem, rubbing cut 
surfaces with lemon halves as you go. Cut away the top ⅓ of the artichoke. 
Detach the trimmed stem and slice it into four lengthways, then cut the trimmed 
artichoke globes into 8 wedges, pulling away any very hairy choke. Immediately, 
drop the wedges and stems of artichoke into a bowl of cold water acidulated 
with lemon.

2 Shell the broad beans and peas. If the broad beans are large and have a 
tough outer coat, remove it by plunging the broad beans in first hot water, 
then cold, and squeezing/pinching off the opaque coat. Peel and slice the 
spring onion.

3 Warm the olive oil in a heavy-based frying pan. Gently fry the sliced onion 
over a medium-low heat until it is soft and translucent. Add the artichoke 
wedges and stems, stir, so each piece is glistening with oil. Add the wine and 
a pinch of salt, stir again, then cover the pan and cook for 10-15 minutes, 
stirring and jigging the pan from time to time. Add the peas and broad beans 
cook for another 5 minutes, adding the torn mint in the last minute. Taste, 
season with salt and taste again. The vignarola is ready when the vegetables 
are tender and come together into a soft, tumbling stew.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award 