
One of the joys of living in the woods is obviously the proximity of nature. 
You are surrounded by the sights, smells and noises of the wild. You live 
according to the seasons. You share your space with animals – both those you 
intended to live with, and those you didn't. Living close to nature is like 
living in a community: the idea sounds delightful, but the reality is hard 
work. I suspect we think nature and community are enchanting precisely because 
most of us have limited contact with them. As PJ O'Rourke once wrote: "Worship 
of nature may be ancient, but seeing nature as cuddlesome, hug-a-bear and too 
cute for words is a strictly modern fashion."

The reality is that this winter, as I'm sure you know, has been exceptionally 
harsh. Just doing the animals takes hours. All the water butts and hoses are 
frozen, so whoever is on duty has to come inside the house and fill up endless 
buckets and watering cans, lugging them outside to the various troughs and 
drinkers. It's almost impossible even to open the doors of the coops, as 
latches are frozen. One door has already broken. And cleaning out the animals 
requires a lot of muscle, as all the dung is rock hard. Our hob has been 
broken, too, by having something frozen dropped on to it.

Other jobs also take twice as long. We're at the end of a long, steep 
cul-de-sac which the car simply can't make it up any more. So we've been 
walking the girls to school and going shopping with rucksacks on our backs. 
We're constantly lighting fires and so spend a lot of time splitting logs for 
kindling, bringing more wood indoors, and so on. The wood-fuel boiler gets 
through two or three barrows a day. Only now we've run out of wood. It sounds 
daft, as we live in a wood, but we didn't fell anything like enough last winter 
to have sufficient seasoned logs for the boiler this winter. I knew we were 
going to be short at some point, that we would have to buy in some logs towards 
the end of the winter, maybe in February or March. I didn't expect that all the 
log sheds would be empty by the New Year.

We haven't seen grass for weeks, and trying to find stuff outside is almost 
impossible: the snow lies like a thick blanket across everything, blurring 
outlines and shapes so you have to guess, or remember, where you put the 
shovel. Branches have simply snapped under the weight of snow. I warily look 
upwards now as I walk in the woods, wondering which one will go next and 
whether it will get me.

In a way I relish the challenge. I like the brutal realities of struggling to 
keep warm and to get food on the table. I like trudging knee-deep in snow to 
bring in eggs or whatever. It appeals to my survivor instincts. And whatever 
the difficulties, it's extraordinarily beautiful. Long after nightfall you can 
walk around without a torch, as the moon reflects off the snow. It's as if the 
day has simply been dimmed, creating an ethereal, other-worldly light. You can 
identify animals from footprints in the snow: rabbits, deer and pheasants.

The trouble is that if snow gives us night vision, it also gives predators an 
advantage. I always count the chickens when I put them to bed (all sorts of old 
proverbs suddenly seem more meaningful out here) and last night I noticed that 
one, a blue belle, was missing. We don't fence in our chickens and sometimes 
they're late to bed, especially in this strange night-time snow glow, so I 
wandered around making clucking noises. I came across a few bluey-grey feathers 
in the snow and realised that Fluffy Blue – that's the sort of name you get 
when you let a three-year-old choose them – was no more. I looked around for 
evidence of fox prints, but couldn't see any. And if it had been a fox it would 
probably have taken the lot. I suspect a buzzard must have seen the appetising 
blue bird outlined against the snow and nose-dived for its dinner.

So we're one chicken down. And my first reaction isn't "poor chicken" but 
"poor us". Losing her means 250 fewer eggs next year, unless we replace her – 
for a precious tenner. Sometimes I feel my heart is being hardened, not 
softened, out here.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
