
I have a confession to make. I didn't grow up on macaroni cheese. Search as I 
might, I can locate no fond memories of my mother serving up a bubbling bowl of 
the stuff on Sunday evenings, or even fobbing us off with the infamousKraft 
version 
<http://www.melburyandappleton.co.uk/american-kraft-macaroni--cheese-family-size-411g-3795-p.asp>
 so beloved across the pond. I have an inkling (best not explored) that it 
would occasionally put in an appearance in the school canteen, but it always 
puzzled me that, despite being largely made up of two of my very favourite 
ingredients, pasta and cheese, with no tomato to lend a spurious suggestion of 
health, I never took to the stuff.

This, then, is my own personal mission of conversion. Everyone loves macaroni 
cheese.Marlene Spieler has written a whole book 
<http://www.post-gazette.com/pg/07007/751309-34.stm> about the stuff. America 
boastsmore than one restaurant <http://nymag.com/listings/restaurant/smac/> 
serving nothing else. Guardian wine writer and cheese fiend Fiona Beckett was 
deluged with entries when she launched amac and cheese competition 
<http://thecheeselover.blogspot.com/2009/12/ultimate-macaroni-cheese-challenge.html>
 on her website a couple of years ago.

Whatever its alleged southern-Italian roots 
<http://www.cliffordawright.com/caw/food/entries/display.php/topic_id/16/id/105/>
, it's a dish which we can safely embrace as an Anglo-American classic, which 
means I can merrily throw all notions of "authenticity" to the wind, and simply 
go with whatever tastes best.

For the sake of my own sanity and waistline, however, I've decided to stick to 
plain macaroni and cheese here, rather than exploring any of the near infinite 
variations on the theme – you can try outThai red curry mac and cheese 
<http://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes/aarti-sequeira/thai-red-curry-mac-n-cheese-recipe/index.html>
 on your own time.

Mum's version
 Tom Norrington-Davies' mum's recipe macaroni cheese. Photograph: Felicity 
Cloake 
In the absence of any advice from my own mum, I turn to chef Tom 
Norrington-Davies' handy collection 
<http://oxfordfood.wordpress.com/2010/03/25/macaroni-cheese/> of maternal 
recipes, Just Like Mother Used to Make. He reckons that "simplicity is the key 
to macaroni cheese... nothing should leap out at you except a clumsy, gooey 
richness". There's no cream or spice here: just a plain white sauce, a modest 
amount of cheddar, and some pasta. The only concession to frippery is the vivid 
red grilled tomatoes that Norrington-Davies mère liked to top the dish with.

Although deliberately and undeniably bland, I find the dish oddly comforting: 
creamy, but not oppressively rich, faintly cheesy, the dominant taste is those 
sweetly caramelised tomatoes. This is nursery food extraordinaire.

Mater's posh version
 Simon Hopkinson and Lindsey Bareham recipe macaroni cheese. Photograph: 
Felicity Cloake 
After pointing out that there's "very little to get wrong here", Simon 
Hopkinson and Lindsey Bareham deliver a googly in The Prawn Cocktail Years by 
calling for penne, rather than macaroni "because the cheese sauce is better 
able to flow inside this larger-sized pasta". A few pointers, they insist, 
"will help to make this familiar yet sometimes disappointing dish into superior 
comfort food."

One is the pasta. The other is, that because "almost all the joy of eating 
Macaroni Cheese comes from its creamy sauce", it's worth "going to town" on the 
seasoning and an "assertively flavoured" cheese. This means infusing the milk 
with a bay leaf and black pepper before making the white sauce, and then adding 
a mature Lancashire cheese, as well as a slug of double cream. Bolder still, 
they suggest chucking in some sliced onion or leeks, softened in a little 
butter, along with a small bunch of chopped chives along with the sauce and 
pasta.

It's all very refined, down to the parmesan topping, but I miss the velvety 
texture of the plain white sauce, and find the onion too bullyingly dominant: 
macaroni cheese should be something one could happily eat in bed, should 
opportunity call, and alliums and pillows should never mix.

Decadence
 Ms Marmite Lover recipe macaroni cheese. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Most of the entries to Fiona Beckett's aforementioned Ultimate Macaroni Cheese 
challenge (won by Helen Graves with afabulous ham hock concoction 
<http://helengraves.co.uk/2010/01/return-of-the-mac/>) included some cunning, 
but unorthodox new ingredient, like pork, or beer, or even chocolate, putting 
them sadly outside my classic remit.

Kirsten Rogers, aka Ms Marmite Lover, however, qualified with an outrageous 
but nonetheless simple recipe 
<http://thecheeselover.blogspot.com/2010/01/macncheese-mania_25.html> which 
employs twice as much double cream as white sauce (Simon and Lindsey, take 
note: this is how you tart up macaroni). The end result is delicious, yet so 
intensely rich that it can only be consumed in the most elegant of portions: 
the kind of comfort food which demands silk sheets and cashmere dressing gowns. 
Which is not exactly what I'm after.

Victorian version
 Mrs Beeton recipe macaroni cheese. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
It makes sense then, to turn to my trusty Mrs Beeton for a recipe, and she 
doesn't disappoint, withdirections for macaroni 
<http://www.exclassics.com/beeton/beet33.htm> "as usually served with the 
cheese course", as well as as distinctly less pleasant sounding sweet milk 
pudding made with the stuff.

It has little in common with anything I've made so far, but ticks a fair few 
boxes in the iSpy book of Victorian cooking cliches by instructing me to cook 
the macaroni, in a pan of milk and water, for 1½ to 1¾ hours, until "quite 
tender". After a mere hour at a "quick boil", my pan boils dry, and I'm forced 
to move on to the next stage of the recipe, tipping the gluey mass into a dish, 
and sprinkling with a quite impressive amount of parmesan cheese and butter.

The macaroni, (which should be "tender but perfectly firm, no part being 
allowed to melt, and the form entirely preserved" – lest one be tempted to cook 
it for so long it actually disintegrated) is then topped with more cheese, 
pepper and breadcrumbs, before receiving a final dose of melted butter for good 
measure and being placed before a "bright fire" to brown the crumbs, or grilled 
with a salamander ("more expeditious" apparently, but I make do with an 
electric grill). If not the prettiest of dishes, it's oddly satisfying, in an 
intensely cheesy, gloopy, buttery sort of way. Comfort food hasn't changed 
much, it seems.

Greasy mac
 Martha Stewart recipe macaroni cheese. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
While cruising mac and cheese forums online (I promise I haven't made these up 
<http://helengraves.co.uk/2010/01/return-of-the-mac/>), I notice one recipe 
comes up more than any other: Martha Stewart's"crack and cheese" 
<http://www.marthastewart.com/271998/perfect-macaroni-and-cheese>, so named 
because of its alleged addictive qualities. America's only slightly tarnished 
domestic goddess seems an obvious choice for a killer mac recipe – in all 
senses, given the amounts of cheese and butter involved.

After a brief, and patriotic lecture on the history of the dish, Martha opines 
that, "making it more comforting, cheesier" is "a completely worthwhile way to 
spend your time." She seems to have done a lot of work on the latter objective: 
I have to put an entire large block of cheddar in, and a sizeable slab of 
gruyère. This mac is making me feel slightly queasy already, but nevertheless, 
I soldier on.

Although it looks dreamy – all golden breadcrumbs and bubbling, creamy sauce, 
on the plate, the dish is a disappointment. All that cheese has made the sauce 
greasy and slightly grainy, and aggressively sharp, rather than comforting.

Cheese and macaroni
 Julia Moskin recipe creamy mac and cheese. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
The more macaronis I make, the more I warm to Tom Norrington-Davies' plain and 
simple, and very British version, with its blandly familiar white sauce, so I 
approach my final recipe with a certain trepidation. Julia Moskin, on aquest 
for the perfect mac and cheese 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/04/dining/04wint.html?pagewanted=1> in the New 
York Times, sets out her stall with a quote from food writer John Thorne on the 
subject: "A good dish of macaroni and cheese is hard to find these days. The 
recipes in most cookbooks are not to be trusted ... usually it is their 
vexatious infatuation with white sauce, a noxious paste of flour-thickened 
milk, for this dish flavored with a tiny grating of cheese. Contrary to popular 
belief, this is not macaroni and cheese but macaroni with cheese sauce. It is 
awful stuff and every cookbook in which it appears should be thrown out the 
window."

Moskin is obsessed with the idea of cheese, admitting her fantasy macaroni is 
"nothing more than tender elbows of pasta suspended in pure molten cheddar, 
with a chewy, golden-brown crust of cheese on top." When in doubt, Julia 
suggests, "add more cheese". Although herrecipe for "creamy macaroni and cheese"
 <> scares me, I'm intrigued by the fact she doesn't pre-cook the macaroni or 
make a white sauce, so I swallow hard and give it a whirl.

The liquid in the dish is a mixture of pureed cottage cheese and milk, 
seasoned with cayenne, mustard powder and nutmeg, and poured over the dry 
pasta. Covered tightly with foil, the pasta soaks up the liquid in the oven, 
leaving it cooked, but with little in the way of the creaminess promised in the 
title – it's dense and cheesy, with a crunchy top of baked pasta which 
threatens to break my teeth. This is not my idea of comfort food.

Cheese and other stories

I've used a variety of cheeses in my experiments; parmesan, as espoused by Mrs 
Beeton, is too aggressively strong. Simon and Lindsay's Lancashire, on its own, 
is too lactic and sharp – I like the sweet nuttiness of the gruyère that Martha 
uses, but it's overpowered by her "sharp white cheddar".

Instead, I go for a nuttier, more mature cheddar that works perfectly with the 
pinch of nutmeg which is the one concession to spice I'm allowing – it's sweet 
and comforting, rather than hot, or sour like the mustard that Kerstin and many 
others include. English mustard powder however, adds a subtle kick without any 
accompanying acidity.

The copious amounts of garlic Jamie Oliver throws into his "killer mac n' 
cheese" 
<http://www.jamieoliver.com/recipes/vegetarian-recipes/a-killer-mac-n-cheese> 
in Jamie's America jars like the onion in the Prawn Cocktail Years recipe: 
macaroni cheese should slip down easily, it's not about strong flavours. 
Grilled tomatoes and Martha's buttered breadcrumb and cheese mixture are enough 
to save the dish from blandness without stealing the limelight from the pasta, 
although I've substituted parmesan for the cheddar on top – its salty 
savouriness is more welcome in small amounts.

Penne or rigatoni is often suggested as a substitute for the macaroni, as per 
Simon and Lindsey, but here, I think, it works perfectly: the pieces are small 
enough to not need cutting and to allow a satisfying volume in the mouth. 
(Also, it can be eaten with a spoon, which is the final proof of great sofa 
food.) I like Martha's advice about rinsing the starch off before adding the 
pasta it to the dish: it helps to keep it separate, rather than clumped 
together in one gluey mass.

Perfect macaroni cheese
 Felicity's perfect macaroni cheese. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Macaroni cheese is all about familiarity and comfort: introducing strong 
flavours like onion, or parmesan, while undoubtedly delicious, misses the 
point. It should be subtly cheesy, creamy and soft – not too dense, or modishly 
al dente, it's a dish that embraces the Victorian values of modesty and quiet, 
plain simplicity.

Serves 2

200g macaroni
35g butter, plus extra for greasing
25g plain flour
450ml whole milk
Grating of nutmeg
½ tsp English mustard powder
50g mature cheddar
1 slice of white bread, made into crumbs
1 tbsp grated parmesan
2 tomatoes, halved

1. Cook the macaroni in plenty of salted boiling water until tender. 
Meanwhile, melt 25g of the butter in a pan, and stir in the flour. Cook, 
stirring, for a couple of minutes, then gradually whisk in the milk until you 
have a smooth sauce. Cook, stirring, for a few minutes until it thickens, then 
add a grating of nutmeg and the mustard and stir in the cheddar until smooth. 
Take off the heat, and season to taste.

2. Pre-heat the grill. Drain the macaroni and rinse under cold running water. 
Grease a baking dish with butter, then combine the pasta and cheese sauce and 
tip into the dish.

3. Melt the remaining butter and then toss it together with the breadcrumbs 
and the parmesan. Spread over the top of the dish, then arrange the tomatoes, 
cut-side up, on top. Grill for about 10 minutes until golden and bubbling. 
Allow to stand for five minutes before serving.

Is macaroni cheese classic comfort food, or bland pap for Victorian palates? 
Do you prefer the outrageously cheesy, American style, or the more understated 
British dish – and will anyone come out and proudly admit they prefer the 
packet version?
