
MPs were in the process of receiving “enhanced” security measures for their 
homes and constituency offices amid heightened fears of attacks, before the 
fatal shooting of the Labour MP Jo Cox.

The Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa) said it had reviewed 
security measures and set aside additional funds for each member of parliament.

Related: Labour MP Jo Cox dies after attack in West Yorkshire – latest updates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/16/eu-referendum-live-osborne-brexit-budget-leave-tories>

The review, which concluded in January, was prompted by concerns that MPs were 
vulnerable to terrorism. Ipsa sources confirmed that MPs were entitled to apply 
for additional security if they believed there was a threat to their safety.

MPs can apply for a standard package of measures which allow them to buy or 
lease security equipment such as alarm systems, shutters, CCTV and personal 
alarms for staff. They can also apply for a “lone worker device” which is a 
personal alarm system that can be carried.

If there is a specific threat relating to parliamentary activity, MPs can 
speak to a police commander to ask for additional enhanced safety measures.

However, there appears to be no specific security advice for MPs as they walk 
the streets. Cox was killed on a street in Birstall, West Yorkshire on Thursday.


According to the website W4mp, which is used by MPs’ staff, those who work in 
constituency offices are encouraged to develop an office code for a potentially 
dangerous or disruptive situation.


Related: Attack on Jo Cox is only the latest serious assault against an MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/jo-cox-attack-latest-serious-assault-mps>

One former worker for an MP wrote on the website: “A constituency office I 
worked in has a code for calling the police in the event of a violent visitor – 
the secretary would call the caseworker in the back room [with a certain 
phrase].”

Security measures for MPs were updated in 2010 after the Labour MP Stephen 
Timms was stabbed twice in the stomach by a constituent in Beckton, east 
London. Roshonara Choudhry, 21, was convicted of attempted murder.

In 2000, the Liberal Democrat MP for Cheltenham, Nigel Jones, and his 
assistant, Andrew Pennington, 39, a local councillor, were attacked with a 
Samurai sword. Pennington was killed, and Jones, now Baron Jones of Cheltenham, 
was severely injured. Robert Ashman, then 49, was subsequently found guilty of 
attempted murder. He admitted to Pennington’s manslaughter on the grounds of 
diminished responsibility in 2003.
