
Those among us who have observed the slow, painful decline of Labour in 
Scotland are now spoilt for choice in trying to identify the party’s darkest 
day. The third Holyrood election in 2007 – which first brought the SNP to power 
– was, until then, the blackest one it had ever experienced. How could the 
natural party of government inScotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>
, the people’s own representatives, have lost to this outfit?

Wasn’t this the party that, just a few years earlier, was still being 
dismissed as a single-issue pressure group possessing sizeable numbers of 
hairy-arsed caber-tossers who sought every day to re-enact Bannockburn? How 
could it have come to this? Lessons would need to be learned and all ideas of 
complacency jettisoned. This was just the jolt the party needed. The people had 
administered a friendly warning, but Labour’s values were Scotland’s values, 
weren’t they? Life would soon get back to normal.

Four years later, it grew darker still. The SNP didn’t just repeat its defeat 
of Labour in 2011, it left them without a shred of influence at Holyrood and, 
in so doing, turnedScottish politics 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/scotland> on its axis. Not to worry, 
though: the Scottish people had never shown any passion for independence and, 
horrified at the prospect, would return to the mother-ship. More lessons would 
need to be learned … and they would be.

Last year though, the people (ungrateful bastards) decided simply to stop 
messing about and simply evict its former masters. Was there ever a day darker 
than this? The Westminster elections were supposed to be different from those 
pretend Holyrood ones. Real power still resided at Westminster, where only the 
big boys were allowed to play.

But the SNP were the big boys now, the masters of Scotland’s two separate 
jurisdictions, having left Labour with only one seat from 59. And Labour were 
lucky to get one. More lessons would be learned. The Scottish people were just 
conducting a wee extra-marital affair; Scotland’s core values were stillLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> ones. The people knew it, and 
would soon tire of these shallow assignations and return to the security of 
home and family.

If the Labour party has indeed reached the end of its natural life as a viable 
entity in Scotland, then 5 May will be remembered as the day the lights finally 
went out. Being replaced by the SNP as the favoured party of social justice in 
Scotland is humiliating enough. But how do you recover from defeat by the 
ScottishConservatives <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> at a 
time when their Westminster brethren are making poor people bear the burden of 
reducing the UK deficit while ringfencing the fortunes of the rich?

Even as recently as five years ago, you would have got shorter odds on East 
Stirlingshire beating Real Madrid than on the Scottish Conservative and 
Unionist party gaining more seats at Holyrood than Labour.

Many of Labour's senior figures still refuse to apologise for the party’s 
conduct during the independence referendum

Labour didn’t run a bad campaign for Holyrood 2016. It was certainly an 
improvement on any of the previous three. InKezia Dugdale 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/kezia-dugdale> the party possesses a smart 
young leader who, though inexperienced, was sure-footed enough not to repeat 
the aberrations of her predecessors. She was not Jim Murphy and she never 
chastised her party’s supporters for wanting a “something for nothing” society.

It’s Dugdale’s personal misfortune to have inherited a party in disarray and 
to have encountered inNicola Sturgeon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> the most formidable 
politician Scotland has ever produced. When it comes to authentic, socially 
progressive policies, Scotland’s first minister has been criticised for merely 
talking a good game. That may be so. Labour’s problem, though, is that words 
and phrases such as anti-austerity, social justice and equality now somehow 
sound better when delivered by Sturgeon than by them.

The Labour party has also grossly underestimated how much the constitutional 
question of Scottish independence still dominates political discourse in 
Scotland. That is forgivable; what is not forgivable is how, even now, many of 
its most senior figures still refuse to apologise for the party’s conduct 
during the independence referendum. Everyone else who participated in that 
campaign gained something; the Labour party in Scotland lost its soul.

Scottish Tories are already overstating the scale of their achievement on 
Thursday but they need a reality check. Scotland is still an intensely 
anti-Tory country andRuth Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, leader of the Scottish 
Conservatives, will have next to no influence on the next parliamentary 
session. This, though, should not diminish how bad Scottish Labour’s situation 
is. The party’s decline is on the verge of being terminal. In these 
circumstances, one more wrong move will be fatal. Doing nothing is not an 
option, either.

In the short term, removing Dugdale as leader is inadvisable, and certain men 
in grey suits from the west of Scotland must back off now. Instead she must be 
allowed the opportunity to get a Labour dog into the constitutional fight. 
There is only one way of doing this short of fully embracing Scottish 
independence. She must go back to 2008, when one of her more able predecessors,
Wendy Alexander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/may/11/scotland.scotland>, 
challenged the Scottish Nationalists on an independence referendum she knew 
they were reluctant to stage by daring them to “bring it on”.

Perversely, the political terrain in Scotland is now more favourable to such a 
tactic by the Labour leader. The SNP’s leaders are walking a high wire on the 
independence question. They daren’t get the timing wrong as they know the 
second one will also be the last one. Nor can they risk leaving it for too 
long, lest the idea of independence and separation in an increasingly 
inter-connected world lose its charm.

The last thing the SNP needs as it seeks to convince its own supporters that 
it is serious about radical reform of health and education is the Labour party 
each week – and it has to be each week – shouting: “What are you afraid of? 
Bring it on. We’re now comfortable with independence. Are you?” There is some 
risk attached to this strategy but it’s the only card the Labour party 
possesses.

For, at this curiously delicate point in Scottish political history, the SNP 
is most assuredly not comfortable with the idea of Scottish independence.
