
The dilemma This summer I met a woman in Sweden who is married, with young 
children. We have been in constant contact and have met up in secret. She and I 
had the best sex of our lives. She and her husband have agreed to separate 
after they sell their home next spring and she says she wants me to be in 
Sweden as soon as possible. She phones me every day asking for advice on how to 
end her marriage and about how to control her unruly children. We also talk 
about sex a lot. However she is still not 100% sure if she will ever leave her 
husband. I’ve helped her develop childcare strategies, but she still won’t 
commit to a long-term relationship if I make the move. I worry that she just 
wants me for sex. My life here is on hold – I have lost interest in my job and 
my extended family and have held back from dating. I have three adult children 
and own my house, so I could move quickly. Should I give up my life in this 
country and move to Sweden? Should I insist on a firmer commitment from her 
before I take this step?

Mariella replies  It is certainly a good time to take stock. New Year is all 
about fresh starts, but I’m a little concerned about where this adventure is 
taking you. While there are no guarantees in any relationship, your lover 
presently seems to be holding all the cards.

Not that many would have resisted the initial encounter you outline in your 
longer letter. A divorced man at a Swedish summer party meets a fantasy Scandi 
who hasn’t had sex with her husband for years and is desperate for a man. It 
almost sounds too good to be true, and certainly worthy of a film script. In 
the Swedish noir version you’d end up alone, the passionate affair no 
substitute for the ties of family, unless her husband proved to be a serial 
killer or some other kind of miscreant.

But back to you. Who wouldn’t want such a romance in later life, though the 
return to parenting might be an unwelcome new responsibility with your own all 
grown up and gone? Yet you’re the one rushing ahead, while she remains sitting 
comfortably on the fence. It makes me slightly wary of any further radical move 
on your part. A degree of commitment more tangible than sex with benefits would 
be a good place to start when you’re planning to sell up and move country.

Then again I’m not sure throwing away everything you’ve worked and strived for 
simply because you’re overcome by ardour is such a good idea in any case. I do 
tend to lack a romantic instinct when the soulmate topic is raised. Instead I 
fast-forward to arguments about domestic duties, parenting, finance, commitment 
and a return to passionless nights. If you were at the receiving end of my 
mailbox, you might be similarly disenchanted with what we do in the name of 
passion and its loosely related companion, love.

Why do you want this relationship to be more than the sexually satisfying 
affair it currently is?

Let me be blunt. To sell up, leave your family behind and arrive jobless in a 
country where you don’t speak the language, because of a needy woman with whom 
you have great sex, isn’t the most promising of starts to a new chapter in your 
life. There seem to be so many elements you haven’t considered in your 
equations. Your own children may be adult, but don’t underestimate the 
importance of easy access to them and the support structure such extended 
family offers. Neither do you mention the role you’d play in her kids’ lives. 
If your dreams come true and she replaces her husband with you, will you still 
be having great sex when you’re getting up for the school run? Giving up so 
much that’s important in your life for a woman who’s offering so little aside 
from the possible conclusion to her unhappy marriage seems an act of reckless 
abandon.

The advisory role you’ve been cast in also worries me. Opining on her marriage 
and her “unruly children” is really not appropriate and suggests that you’re 
both exploiting each other’s weakness. You’re cast as the mature adviser, she 
the needy child, and neither carries good tidings for a solid future union. Why 
do you want this relationship to be more than the sexually satisfying affair it 
currently is? I’d ask myself that question and spend some time considering the 
answer.

There are many ways to enhance your sense of self-worth without propelling 
yourself towards a ready-made family which, on the slim chance it works out, 
looks set to be quite a commitment. What’s on the table for you right now is 
slim pickings. I’d be tempted to stay in touch, but stay put until she can 
commit enough time to your relationship to rustle up more of a smorgasbord.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>
Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
