
She screamed at me from across my own garden, “Restios are not grasses, they 
are their own unique family and you shouldn’t grow them like grasses either!” I 
felt so uncomfortable in my own skin and my own garden, I shall never, ever, 
forget it.

Pauline, in her time, had been well known and respected for her work with the 
monocotyledons of South Africa. Her knowledge, gained through hard work on the 
subject, remained second to none until she passed away just after Christmas 
last year. Through papers written in her youth and her sometimes abrasive, 
unswerving accuracy of instruction later in life, there are many 
horticulturists and botanists out there who, like me, are so much better at 
what we do because of her. Pauline shared her knowledge freely and only 
goodness would help you if you didn’t listen. That little bit of knowledge she 
shared that day helped me to better grow a family of plants I would otherwise 
have treated quite differently.

In my own day-to-day work, I suffer from a loss of that specific kind of 
knowledge. I spend a lot of time trawling through ancient back issues of
Curtis’s Botanical Magazine 
<http://www.kew.org/science-conservation/research-data/publications/curtiss-botanical-magazine>
 and scientific papers, looking for the answers to questions that I cannot 
answer otherwise. For some of the species of plants I grow, I really wish I had 
someone who I could phone to ask my burning questions. Some of the plants I 
grow have never been grown in cultivation before, but more often I find that 
they were cultivated successfully here in the UK at some point in the past. A 
gardener sometime, somewhere knew just what made them tick; they had that 
little snippet of information that made the difference between success and 
failure.

It’s not even always the rare species that I struggle with, either. In the 
1800s the southern heaths were all the rage: one species,Epacris impressa 
<http://anpsa.org.au/e-imp.html>, had more than 200 known cultivars. Nowadays 
there is only one species of Epacris in general cultivation here in the UK; 
they are considered tricky, tender and difficult to germinate. A plant once so 
common and easily cultivated has fallen out of favour and the knowledge of how 
to grow it is lost in the mists of time. What was it that changed? Had it been 
so common that the information on how to grow it was not deemed significant and 
so wasn’t passed on? I growE. impressa, and through trial, error and searching, 
I am re-learning the skills needed for to make it grow.

In a world of paywalls and intellectual rights, accessing the more technical 
information can be expensive or impossible. Finding just a little hint that 
leads you on the right track can be difficult, and often a reference book, good 
article or an expert to speak to can be invaluable. When a search on the 
internet is the first thing we all do to find information, making real contact 
with other gardeners through horticultural societies, forums or social media 
can be far more instructive.

So I implore you as gardeners to share what you know - spread it around. Make 
the knowledge, be it about common bedding or the rarest of the rare, readily 
available to the world. Write it down somewhere and don’t ever let it be lost. 
It may be the little nugget of information that someone sometime in the future 
needs to change the world.

I miss you Pauline. I didn’t know you very well, but I miss you and the 
knowledge that left when you did.
