
There are times when it seems spectacularly stupid to have had five children. 
It's so hard to keep on top of them. I suspect I have just failed Tilly, who's 
11 and starting secondary school. I have not prepared her. Other parents have 
taken their children on dry runs to their new schools. I realise, too late, 
that Tilly's friends have all become more independent than her – they get buses 
to each other's houses, they walk up the road for coffee. They have even dealt 
with a dodgy man in the local park. I'm not sure we've even given Tilly the 
stranger-danger talk.

On the plus side, however, I did buy her school uniform early, before only the 
uncool long skirts were left. But I have to go back for items I hadn't realised 
were essential. In my day, for example, part of the joy of hockey was in 
bashing each other's legs, and comparing bruises afterwards. Nowadays, children 
not only wear shin pads but also gum shields.

"I can't believe they really wear these," I half ask the shop assistant.

"Oh yes they do," she says. "This one's the best." She hands me one for £15. I 
want to buy the one I can see for half the price but worry it'll seem I don't 
care about my daughter's teeth.

Buying the school bag requires a day trip all of its own. Tilly tries out at 
least 15, including a few that are clearly designer handbags and wouldn't hold 
a pencil case. I am super-humanly patient.

We come home with a bag that is nowhere near a school bag as I knew it, with 
no compartments and a floral pattern.

"She'll get beaten up on the bus with that bag," J whispers to me.

"No she won't," I say firmly. "It's from New Look. It's fashionable."

As we haven't done a dry run to school, it's lucky that on her first day she's 
getting a lift from the mother of a friend in her class. Rather sweetly, I 
feel, she wants me to go with her. J and I both go "Aaah … " when Tilly comes 
downstairs in her uniform, but there's no time to take a picture as we have to 
run down the road to get our lift.

We wait at our appointed place. I have my arm round her, kissing the top of 
her head. And we wait and we wait. Ten minutes, then 15 minutes pass, and I 
start to panic. I know this mother and she would never, ever be late. Tilly 
looks visibly upset.

I peer hopefully down the road.

"What sort of car does she have?" I ask.

Tilly thinks and compares it to ours.

"A clean one," she says.

A frantic phone call later, and it turns out that we are waiting in the wrong 
place. The other mother and I blame each other, but politely. We get there in 
time.

I get the bus home to check it out. It's packed and a fight nearly breaks out 
between the driver and a passenger who swears (loudly) that he pressed the 
buzzer to get off.

"So why didn't you stop, man? I'm going to report you."

At that moment, Maddy, my oldest daughter, phones to ask where I am.

"How nice and relaxing to be sitting on a bus," she says.

Five minutes later, we are all turfed on to the side of a dual carriageway to 
wait for the next bus. One of us is a middle-aged man who is shouting at voices 
he can hear in his head.

Poor Tilly, who has been ferried around since birth, will need some help in 
navigating this adult world. When I pick her up, the signs are not good.

"I am soooo tired," she says. "And I can't work out where my classroom is."
