
The official body for Australian GPs has asked pharmacists to strip their 
shelves of homeopathic products and warned doctors not to prescribe them 
because they do nothing.

The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) has formally 
recommended GPs stop prescribing homeopathic remedies and says pharmacists must 
also stop stocking such products because there is no evidence they are 
effective in any way.

The RACGP’s position statement on homeopathy, released on Wednesday, follows 
recent findings by the NationalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Medical Research Council that 
homeopathy produces no health benefits over and above a placebo.


Related: Homeopathy not effective for treating any condition, Australian 
report finds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/mar/11/homeopathy-not-effective-for-treating-any-condition-australian-report-finds>

The RACGP president, Dr Frank Jones, warned people who turned to homeopathic 
products to address health issues could be putting themselves at risk.


Such unproven products might cause them to delay seeking out proper medical 
care, or lead them to reject conventional medical approaches entirely, he said.


He expressed particular concerns about so-called homeopathic vaccines.


“These alternatives do not prevent diseases or increase protective antibodies 
and there is no plausible biological mechanism by which these alternatives 
could prevent infection,” he said.


“Individuals and the community are exposed to preventable diseases when 
homeopathic vaccines are used as an alternative to conventional immunisation.”


Dr Jones said the lack of evidence about any benefits from homeopathy must 
prompt doctors and pharmacists to turn their backs on it.


“Given this lack of evidence, it does not make sense for homeopathy products 
to be prescribed by GPs or sold, recommended or supported by pharmacists,” he 
said.


RACGP noted all taxpayers were funding homeopathy through the federal 
government’s private health insurance rebate.


The Pharmacy Guild of Australia says it’s up to individual pharmacists to 
decide if they’ll stop selling homeopathic remedies branded useless by doctors.

The pharmacy guild says it is not a regulatory authority, and as such there 
will be no recommendation backing RACGP’s call for homeopathic products to be 
taken off the market.

But it says its advice to pharmacists is to ensure customers have access to 
objective, informed advice about complementary medicines.

“Pharmacists, as health professionals, have a duty of care to be aware of 
available clinical evidence that supports the therapeutic and marketing claims 
made about all products sold in their pharmacies,” the guild said in a 
statement.
