
The other day someone accused me of doing the minimum possible amount of 
childcare, just to get something to write about: I've got to say, this remark 
treads an amazing tightrope. I think if my sister or a very good friend had 
said it, I would have taken umbrage, not on the basis that it was untrue, but 
on the understanding that we're not all supposed to be standing around with our 
arms crossed, lips clamped round a metaphorical fag, making arch judgments 
about one another's shortcomings, even if we were to do it in a funny way.

If someone I didn't know, who had children, said it, I suppose I would think 
it was your classic parental boundary problem, where parents can only make 
sense of their own decisions if they set up a constant chorus of how much 
better they are than everybody else's. And even though all of us do that, some 
of us are better than others at keeping a silent chorus. If someone who didn't 
have children said it, I would think, screw you! What do you know about my 
work-life balance? Maybe I weave all his clothes and I'm doing an Open 
University degree: did you ever think about that, huh?

For some reason, a combination maybe of our slight but not meaningless 
acquaintance and her skittish manner, this person, B, didn't offend me at all, 
which frees me up to say that, yes, she's pretty much right. I do Mondays, but 
not just with T, also with his cousins. Tuesdays, C's mother does and Thursdays 
my sister swaps for the Mondays. Wednesdays and Fridays he is tended by E, a 
woman whom I persistently introduced to people as "E, who looks after T 
sometimes", until last week I had a flash of realisation. "What am I talking 
about, 'sometimes'? She looks after him more than I do. She's his nanny, do you 
understand? NANNY!"

Naturally, I look after him at weekends, with C, but as my best friend pointed 
once out before I had T, even rich people have to look after their own children 
at weekends. At the time, the idea depressed me. Now, of course, I explode with 
joy at the prospect of looking after T, except for that block of four days a 
week when I'm trying to palm him off on someone else.

The whole business is a paradox. When they're awake, you wish they'd go to 
sleep; when they're asleep, you cannot wait until they wake up, until they've 
been awake for five minutes. When you've got him for the whole day, you spend 
it thinking of all the things you can get done when someone else has him. When 
someone else has him, you're in BabyGap like a wasp in September: purposeless, 
confused, looking at small things you will hopefully dredge up the sense not to 
buy, making a low, buzzing noise.

So anyway, back to my rather scanty childcare. We've established, I think, 
that you can't count weekends, so I only do a day a week. It used to be the 
case that, because there were three of them, it was three times harder than 
having T on his own, but they have gradually levelled into a dynamic where they 
entertain each other, so you couldn't even call it a full day. All I have to do 
is sit in the corner, manning the remote control and making sure that whoever's 
made whoever else cry wasn't just the biggest on the smallest. I'm not running 
Lord of the Flies here, you know.

Of course it is sometimes hard - I'm used to T, so when I say, "What would you 
like, toast or a doughnut or a car?", I expect "Ah!" or "Ook!" What I do not 
expect is "Toast, thank you aunt, with peanut butter but no crusts," from D, at 
exactly the same age. My sister, on the other hand, is never expecting a child 
to throw anything at her, least of all anything that will hit her. So T keeps 
getting her right in the face with, like, a drum, and I think on balance, that 
is harder. It's probably two-thirds of a day, not counting naps. What maniac 
would count a nap as time off? But no, it's not as much as a lot of people do. 
It's not very much more than people who would say they did no childcare at all. 
And yet I still consider myself more or less a full-time parent. Weird.

