
For the first time, I am pleased to wake up and find that the clocks have gone 
back. An extra hour in the day. How fantastic. On this one day, I promise 
myself, I will get the children to bed at the time they should usually go to 
bed and I will read for, oh, maybe 45 minutes. Or watch Downton Abbey. Or else 
redo the to-do list for the wedding we are having in three weeks. Top of the 
list is to send out the invitations. In truth, we haven't quite finished 
writing them. This extra hour could be our salvation.

I refuse to turn the clock back, so I can enjoy this feeling of being ahead. 
It's going to be a busy day. First, we go shopping to buy Maddy, who is 19, a 
dress for the soon-to-be-upon-us wedding.

"What did you have in mind?" I ask her, slightly fearful that this shopping 
expedition could be an all-day event. I bought my dress in less than two hours 
by going to one shop. Admittedly, a friend had not only found the dress on the 
internet, but had also sent me the link, phoned to see if I liked it, contacted 
the shop to reserve it and then met me there to try it on. But in my mind it 
will always be a personal triumph.

"Oh, I'll wear anything," Maddy says. "After all, I don't want to outshine the 
bride."

"But of course you'll outshine me, unless you put a paper bag over your head. 
And rightly so, because you are young and lovely, and I am not," I say, 
cheerfully.

Maddy is genuinely horrified. "Don't you dare say that."

"Yes, Mum, if you feel like that you could always put a paper bag over your 
own head," says one of her sisters, helpfully.

"Can I make a speech at your wedding?" asks Lydia.

"No," I reply. "It's not usual for children to make a speech."

"The other children might like to hear me make a speech."

There are, in fact, a lot of children going – more than the number of adults, 
last time we counted. "Well, what would you say?" I ask.

"I would say: 'Although my mum and dad have had their ups and downs, they are 
finally starting married life. And I hope they don't get divorced, ha ha ha.' "

"And that," says Maddy, "is why no one lets children make speeches at 
weddings."

In spite of, or even because of, her three sisters tagging along, Maddy finds 
a dress relatively quickly. While she tries it on, I have to stop baby Flora 
crawling up to strangers and licking their shoes, but we still manage to get 
home ahead of schedule.

"I'll just check on the time I need to get you to X's birthday party," I 
tell Lydia, which is when the day starts to fall apart. X's party started two 
hours ago. I mistook the pick-up time for the start time.

Lydia is clearly upset, verging on the broken-hearted.

"I'm so sorry – there's so much going on," I say. "How can I make it up 
to you?"

I wait for some outlandish request, but she just looks sad.

We go out to have a quick cup of tea with friends, rush to get Tilly to a 
choir practice that doesn't exist because it's half-term and visit J's mum, 
who's poorly. And at nearly 10pm, Tilly is still hunting for her science book 
for school. Baby Flora, fresh from an unscheduled three-hour nap is trying to 
stand up against the wall. The wedding invitations remain unsent.

And I realise that, of course, one extra hour is nothing. For now, there will 
never be enough hours in the day.
