
This is not a day for a panda joke. As I wait to meet Ruth Davidson, leader of 
the Scottish Conservatives, at her office in Holyrood, Edinburgh zoo announces 
thatTian Tian, their most reproductively challenged resident, is finally 
pregnant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/12/giant-panda-tian-tian-pregnant-edinburgh-zoo>
. The ratio of pandas to Conservative MPs in Scotland looks set to increase, 
and not in her party's favour.

But Davidson herself is a rarity: at 35, she is the youngest ever party leader 
in the country, having joined the Conservatives only six years ago andrun for 
leadership in 2011, months after she was first elected as an MSP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/nov/13/ruth-davidson-kevin-mckenna>
. In a party still dominated by the privately schooled sons of the wealthy 
south, she is a state-educated woman whose parents hail from the working class 
Glasgow districts of Castlemilk and Merrylee. And most notably, though she 
might wish it otherwise – "I want it to not be an issue" – Davidson is the 
first out lesbian ever to lead a British political party.

Davidson's proportions are exceedingly compact, yet she moves at a pace that 
would challenge Usain Bolt. Her mind runs likewise; the gamine crop and elfin 
features may give the initial impression of a schoolgirl debater, but she is 
fiercely in charge of her brief and plainly relishing her role.

"I'm the sort of person that is quite gallus," she tells me. (For the most 
current definition of this piece of Scottish vernacular, I refer the reader to 
Alex Salmond's descriptionof Glasgow's recent Commonwealth Games as "gallus" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/03/glasgow-closing-ceremony-commonwealth-games-2014>
, meaning "cheeky, cheerful, confident, in an attractive way".) "If somebody 
says I can't do something then it's: 'Right, I'll show you,' and I'll go and do 
it. I tend to not be put off trying for things if there are a few obstacles in 
my way. I'm quite a cussed person."

This deliberate self-awareness is threaded throughout her conversation: she 
talks about the merits of changing one's mind, the steepness of her learning 
curve and growing in the job. And it is difficult to judge whether this is 
expedient – she waswidely criticised for her early performance at first 
minister's questions 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/18/scottish-tory-leader-unveils-policies>
, for example – or simply refreshing.

Davidson was undoubtedly a wildcard when she was elected leader, albeit one 
with the imprimatur of David Cameron. And many believe that her predecessor, 
Annabel Goldie, for whom she had worked as an aide, backed her against the more 
experienced candidate Murdo Fraser out of personal loyalty rather than 
ideology. There were also suspicions that her lack of experience rendered her 
compliant to the wider party establishment both inScotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and Westminster.

Some in the party were horrified when she abruptly changed policy on the 
independence referendum – though others saw it as strategic and necessary 
modernising. During the leadership contest, Davidson had famously described her 
opposition to any new tax and legal powers for Scotland as a "line in the 
sand". But this June, in a U-turn described as"vintage 'year zero' politics" by 
the Guardian's Scotland correspondent Severin Carrell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/02/scottish-tory-leader-ruth-davidson-ruth-davidson>
, she endorsed in full the recommendations of a party commission led by Lord 
Strathclyde, including the key proposal for Scotland to have complete power 
over all personal income tax.

She didn't cross the line in June, she says, not answering my question, 
because "the Strathclyde commission was set up nearly two years ago, and things 
change really fast in this campaign". Holyrood doesn't meet the aspirations of 
the Scottish people: "Nobody [who serves as MSP] has to look a taxpayer in the 
eye ... because the money always comes from somewhere else and I think that 
disconnect is wrong." So is she really confident that the UK party will keep 
promises of further powers to the Scottish parliament in the event of a no 
vote? "Yes," she says firmly.

Despite Boris Johnson's comments last week that there was "no need" for them? 
She doesn't skip a beat: "You know, its amazing. When the prime minister leaves 
Westminster for a week with the wife, all the wannabes, has-beens and 
never-weres come out of the woodwork because they've got their five minutes in 
the sun. This has been a long process for our party: the prime minister is on 
side, the chancellor is on side, I've sat down with Jo Johnson, Boris's 
brother, who is writing our manifesto. Yes, if we are the government after 
2015, we will implement this."

Given that Johnson's intervention was by no means the most significant during 
David Cameron's holiday, I inevitably ask her if she includes Baroness Warsi in 
that unflattering description. This time she balks, telling me that I wouldn't 
expect her to be drawn on individuals: "My head doesn't button up the back!" 
Does she have any sympathy for Warsi's concerns regarding the coalition's 
policy on Gaza? "Did you wear that pin on purpose?" she bats back (I'm wearing 
a ribbon of the entwined saltire and Palestinian flag) before embarking on a 
bland invocation of the two-state solution.

But Warsi was similarly critical about the Conservatives' failure to engage 
with ethnic minority voters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/10/sayeeda-warsi-tory-ethnic-minority-vote>
, the implication being that the rise of Ukip meant the leadership was looking 
in the opposite direction. Ukip secured its first Scottish MEP in May, though 
with a much lower share of the vote than in England.

Davidson is quick to list the actions she has taken to increase diversity 
within the party – from appointing a vice-chair for women to increasing 
disabled access at candidate selection – but insists that Ukip's success in 
Scotland was Alex Salmond's fault. "Ukip were nowhere near polling enough to 
get an MEP until Alex Salmond came out three or four days before the European 
election and pushed the message it was [the SNP] or Ukip for the sixth seat," 
she argues. "He basically told people how to give him a bloody nose ahead of 
the referendum. A lot of that is an anti-Salmond vote, rather than a pro-Ukip 
vote."

So she doesn't feel the need to address a specific message to white, 
working-class voters who may be concerned about immigration? "Yes, I want to 
get that white, working-class vote back; that's the Tory vote that my parents 
come from. They're both from Glasgow council estates where we used to have huge 
votes, and people of their generation have stayed with us but their children 
and grandchildren have not. But I'm not willing to compromise the ideals of the 
party for cheap gesture politics.

"We've had 25 years of stagnation and decline in our party in Scotland and you 
don't turn that around overnight. You don't do it in one electoral cycle; you 
build for the long term, and that's what I'm doing."

It's certainly the case that the Conservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> have been doing marginally 
better in recent polls and council by-elections. The referendum campaign has 
been galvanising for party members, she says: "Their tails are up. They see a 
fight that they really care about in the constitution, that we're winning."

Davidson says she remembers the date she joined the party – 31 October 2008 – 
as it was the day she put in for voluntary redundancy at the BBC, where she 
worked as a radio journalist for six years. "Because I was front of mic almost 
all of my career, I had a hardcore view that I had to be seen to be impartial. 
I didn't think that being a member of a political party in any way worked with 
what I was trying to do as a journalist. When I came on board, Annabel [Goldie] 
didn't know I was a Tory – which, given that I'd interviewed her many times, 
shows I must have been doing something right."

It speaks also to a pretty devastating self-discipline, which one can only 
assume was transferable to her time as a signaller in the Territorial Army, and 
her ongoing interest in kickboxing (Davidson's hobbies are anything but 
bluestocking). And she remains a consummate broadcaster, even when there's only 
one other person in the room: steepled hands, lips-only smiles, and fluid tones 
that run from combative leadership to self-deprecating asides with no obvious 
gear changes.

When I suggested this interview to her a few weeks ago, she responded with a 
wry eye-roll: "The Guardianloves lesbians!" Does it frustrate her that there is 
such media focus on her sexuality? "When we were running for the leadership and 
there were four candidates, it was really obvious that in every newspaper they 
had what the other candidates' jobs were, their position in the party, and the 
lesbian kickboxer.

"That was slightly annoying to me," she adds, in what I suspect is the 
grossest of understatements. "It has calmed down a bit now, which is great."

She starts etching lines on her briefing papers, head bent. She is no longer 
broadcasting. "I've found it quite difficult being publicly gay because it's 
not something that I've ever sought to talk about. I'm always asked about it so 
it always turns up in print because I'm never going to say I'm not talking 
about that because I think that I have a responsibility to make it not 
something that's secret, or that you are ashamed to talk about."

She has spoken of being moved to tears when the Scottish parliament passed its 
equal marriage bill earlier in the year. "I worked hard so that people in the 
party knew that I was speaking for me and it was a free vote, but also that it 
was something that I believed in and was passionate about. And that you can 
believe in something and be passionate about it without that being the only 
driver for you. And I would hope that there's much more to me in terms of what 
I want to achieve in politics, but that doesn't diminish how much it meant to 
me when that bill passed."

She apologises unnecessarily: "That was really muddled, I'm really sorry."

But is she ever able to stand back and think to herself: "Fuck me ..." I can't 
complete the question because she is already roaring with laughter, "... 
someone like this is in charge of the Scottish Conservatives!" Because it is a 
'fuck me', I tell her, inelegantly, while we live in the world we do.

She relaxes now: "You see, I don't think it is, in a weird way, because nobody 
ever sees themselves in terms of boxes. There's lots that I want to do as 
Scottish Conservative leader and very few of them have anything to do with my 
sexuality. But I take your point, in that it was big to other people."

She insists that it has never been big among party members. Davidson was, 
after all, the first Scottish leader to be elected by one member one vote, just 
as David Cameron was for the UK party. "For all people try to project things on 
to the Conservative party, we've got a really good record of picking people 
that perhaps aren't the identikit politician ... a grocer's daughter 
from Grantham ..."

But she put through section 28! "Well, David Cameron went into the crucible of 
the Stonewall conference to apologise for section 28 and say that the party was 
wrong. And he's right, the party was wrong, for me, pure and simple."

She returns to the significance of her position: "What brought it home to me 
as a bigger thing than I thought it was, was that I got lots of emails from 
teenagers across Scotland, some of whom were out, some of whom weren't, who had 
written to say: 'We totally never thought a gay person would become a party 
leader in Scotland.' 

"Some of these emails were so personal, and so ..." – she reaches for the 
apposite word – "... raw, that it made me properly decide that this was 
something that I would never shy away from or tuck behind my ear, because it 
mattered to other people. And it made me determined that I would make these 
people proud of me. To be the best that I could be so that I would in no way 
let these people down."

Does she ever feel isolated? "Yes!!!" she explodes. "Leadership can be 
quite lonely, but please don't write up that I'm in my garret crying into my 
beer every night because that's just not the case ...

"But the buck does stop here and I accept that and I sought it – I want to be 
the person who is making the big calls. I will always try to make the best 
decisions that I can with the information that I have available, and that way I 
will always be able to defend any decision I make. If I stick to that, I will 
always be able to look myself in the eye."
