
Cooking from Delia is a lot like being part of a particularly strict religious 
order: if you follow the rules – and there are a lot of them – everything will 
be well. If you don’t, you may end up cursed with boils or condemned to an 
eternity in hell.

This week, I didn’t follow the rules – and suffered the terrible consequences.

One difference between Delia and organised religion is that she explains her 
rules, at times to excessive length. Delia delivers a stirring lecture on the 
importance of having the right tools if you want to cook an omelette. We agree 
on a lot – I, like Delia, have left a plastic kitchen implement in the pan and 
returned to find that tonight’s risotto is now extra crunchy – but we part ways 
when she tells me I need to buy a new frying pan, as none of mine are the right 
size for the task in hand.

Hold on, Delia. This is How to Cook, not How to Buy Utensils. It’s late. It’s 
raining. I have work the following morning. I want to make an omelette, write 
about it, and move on. I’m not heading into town to hunt down a frying pan. 
I’ll take my chances with my over-large pan.

At first, things go well – I melt the butter and oil, then whack up the heat 
and add the eggs. So far, so good. On cue, the promised “bubbly frill” appears 
on the edge of the pan. “Now you can tilt the pan to 45 degrees,” promises 
Delia, “and, using a tablespoon, draw the edge of the omelette into the centre. 
The liquid egg will flow into and fill the space”.

I do just that – but there isn’t enough liquid. The pan is too big, and the 
egg is cooking – alright, burning – faster than it should. In a panic, I fold 
it hurriedly and toss it on to a nearby plate.

The resulting meal looks like a tumour and tastes like a heart attack. It’s 
rubbery, and has the flavour of burnt oil. My partner refuses to touch it, and 
stares at it suspiciously until I throw it away. We eat courtesy of a 
little-known Delia tome: How To Admit Defeat and Order Takeaway.

The following day, I buy a smaller frying pan. The resulting omelette tastes 
delicious.

Related: Relearn to cook with Delia: boiled eggs | The Delia project 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/15/delia-smith-how-to-boil-an-egg-stephen-bush-the-delia-project>

“Now you have mastered the art of a plain omelette,” Delia writes, in a tone I 
cannot help but read as passive-aggressive, “you can begin to think about 
fillings.”

I opt for mushrooms, because, still bruised by that first attempt, I want 
something that it is essentially impossible to ruin, and your common-or-garden 
chestnut mushroom is as close to idiotproof as you can get. Delia suggests 
cooking them in butter. (In general, unless I say otherwise, it is always best 
to assume that Delia suggests cooking things in butter.)

Thankfully, once you’ve got omelettes down pat, filling them is easy. Just one 
thing – when you start to run out of liquid, you’ve got to get your fillings in 
fast or you’ll end up with a dry omelette. Keep them as close as you can to the 
stove. (And, when buying your pan, keep as close to Delia’s measurements as 
possible).

Stephen Bush is a writer and columnist for the New Statesman. @stephenkb 
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb> He is cooking from Delia’s Complete How to Cook 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/delia-s-complete-how-to-cook.html> (BBC 
Books, £40). Watch Delia Smith’s free Online Cookery School videos at
deliaonline.com <http://www.deliaonline.com>; @DeliaOnline 
<https://twitter.com/DeliaOnline>
