
Last term 35% of special schools visited by Ofsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> inspectors received an 
“outstanding” grade. That’s a stunning rate, and yet no one seemed to notice.

Mainstream schools were far less successful – only 9% received the top rating. 
Yet, when free schools pulled the tiniest bit ahead of this, the celebratory 
roar within government was deafening. BBC Question Time became a weekly 
propaganda fest; press releases flowed from the Department for Education.

When the schools serving our most vulnerable children more than trebled that 
rate there was not a whisper. No minister touted the fact. There was not even a 
line of celebration in Ofsted’s annual report.

It is as though there is a collective blindness around special schools – 
perhaps because most parents can pack their child off to the school around the 
corner and never once need to think about the families whose breakfasts revolve 
around specialist transport or carer change-overs. Likewise, most politicians 
cater to the middle, not to this group of parents who are often too exhausted 
to be politically active.

Talking with special school headteachers, many say that being ignored is what 
has made them so successful. Away from the glare of politicians intent on using 
schools to garner votes, the staff of special schools can quietly focus on what 
really matters: making their school a welcoming place. Instead of focusing on 
what the data says an “average” child should achieve, and driving an entire 
class towards that goal, the smaller class sizes and more relaxed approach to 
progress in special schools means teachers can respond to the needs of each 
child, based on individual strengths and weaknesses. In that context, they say, 
it is easier to be outstanding.

That’s the rose-tinted interpretation – and it’s one I want to believe. But 
there is a potential alternative explanation.

When I spoke to parents of children with special needs, several wondered if 
the higher Ofsted grades were a function of less rigorous expectations on 
special schools.

Instead of brilliant schools, could it be that inspectors are overly moved by 
a syrupy view of disability? When they observe happy children with complex 
needs who appear to behave and look well treated, do inspectors whack out 
generous “outstanding” judgments as a way of rewarding the school for relieving 
society of its guilt about what to do with disabled children, rather than 
basing the grading on whether students are being fully extended to learn?

No one wants to believe this version. I certainly don’t. If we did, we’d have 
to accept that a group of people working their socks off in difficult 
conditions might not be doing such a good a job as we need them to.

Adjudicating between the two hypotheses is almost impossible though. I keep 
thinking of a student I taught with a rare and severe form of epilepsy. Each 
time she suffered a seizure, her development regressed. Numbers she knew one 
day disappeared the next. How could an inspector, unlikely to have heard of her 
condition and probably only in a classroom for 20 minutes or so,  truly know if 
she had been stretched to learn? It seems impossible.

A search for reports on special schools to resolve the conundrum draws a 
blank. While Ofsted writes thematic reports about what it sees in schools – in 
the last few years there have been reports on hair and beauty teaching, 
citizenship, and issues of special needs in mainstream schools – I  can find 
nothing specifically about special schools.

Why is there this dearth of information? One special needs headteacher I asked 
said more effort has gone into arranging ways to “throw out” special-needs 
children from mainstream schools than has gone in to improving the places where 
they are being flung. The documents, and a steadily rising number of children 
in special provision over the last six years, appear to back him up.

So which version of the story is correct? Are special needs schools an 
untrumpeted triumph of our schools sector, or is their success an example of 
endemic low expectations? One answer is more comfortable than the other. I hope 
that one is correct.
