
Daily Mail <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> editor-in-chief Paul 
Dacre has called for greater openness in government and lambasted the 
commission on freedom of information for seeking to restrict transparency.

In a personal submission to the commission separate to that of Mail publisher 
AssociatedNewspapers <http://www.theguardian.com/media/newspapers>, Dacre said 
the desire to keep things secret by default was incompatible with the digital 
age.

“At present the default position of Whitehall is that many things should be 
kept secret,” said Dacre. “In a digital age – where leaks are endemic on the 
internet, in the printed press and in instant political memoirs – this is 
unsustainable; there should be a cultural change whereby the default position 
should be an assumption of openness, unless there are overriding reasons for 
secrecy.”


The government commission is considering whether the act is effectively 
balancing the need for secrecy with transparency and whether it places too 
great a burden on government bodies. However, it has been criticised as an 
attempt by government to water down the legislation.

Related: 'Dark ages' warning issued over freedom of information changes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/07/dark-ages-warning-issued-over-freedom-of-information-changes>

Dacre said weakening FoI would only contribute to public distrust of politics. 
“In the main, I suspect, dislike of FoI is driven by Whitehall’s belief that 
civil servants should be exempt from public scrutiny,” he said. “This is in my 
view counter-productive, and perceived by the public simply as a compulsion to 
cover backsides.”

“Civil servants should remember that with authority comes responsibility. They 
should also remember who pays their wages.”

Dacre’s submission claims that ministers attempted to pressure him to 
recommend changes to the Freedom of Information Act while he was in charge of a 
review of the 30-year rule in 2009.

He said that ministers had told him that proposals to reduce the amount of 
time before government records are made public were more likely to be approved 
if he also recommended reform of the FoI Act.

The review recommended the rule should be reduced to 15 years, but did not 
suggest changes to the FoI Act. The government subsequently agreed to a limit 
of 20 years, which is being phased in over a decade.

Related: 30-year rule on release of secret government papers cut to 20 years 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/feb/26/nationalarchives-past> 

Dacre added that the members of the commission left him “utterly unconvinced” 
it would take an open approach to the review. It includes those on the record 
criticising the act, such as former justice secretary Jack Straw, as well as 
the former reviewer of terrorist legislation Lord Carlisle, who has described 
Edward Snowden’s revelations about government surveillance as a “criminal act”.

He said: “Not one of the five commissioners is a journalist or historian, the 
two groups apart from civil servants and politicians with the most direct 
‘professional’ interest in official records. There is no one who can be said to 
represent the public, who make the vast majority of FoI requests, or lobby 
groups and businesses, who are also major users.”

He added: “I find it very disturbing that, rather than recognising this as 
evidence of the need for the act, and celebrating its success, the government 
sees it as a reason for restrictions to be imposed.”

Dacre’s submission, the only one from an individual in a personal capacity, is 
one of more than 100 responses from organisations including government bodies 
and newspapers.

Other newspaper groups, including GNM for the Guardian and Observer and the 
Telegraph Media Group, made submissions in support of the 10-year-old act.
