
Monday morning. The joys of being bumped, jostled and contorted on the 
Northern Line. But then I was squeezed to the size of a gnat alongside a 
heavily pregnant lady who became increasingly frustrated and concerned about 
the impact all that contorting was having on her baby.


Not for the first time, I was genuinely astounded that other commuters were 
happy to ignore her increasingly vocal needs while, on the other hand, was 
surprised that she also didn’t take it upon herself to try and resolve the 
situation by asking for a seat. Simply because it felt like the right thing to 
do, I asked for a seat on her behalf and a very apologetic gentleman sprang to 
life. Job done.

But it got me thinking. Like many of you, I was brought up with the old adage 
‘if you don’t ask... you don’t get’. But, as a consumer and customer champion, 
sometimes it’s hard to help those who refuse to help themselves.

It’s all very well getting frustrated with brands and products that don’t hit 
the mark, which don’t seem to listen to our needs or move with the times. But, 
if we’re honest, are we really doing all we can as their customers to share 
what we want and what we need?

High street brands spend an estimated £3bn 
<https://www.mrs.org.uk/article/item/556> every year on consumer research to 
help them avoid second-guessing our needs. All this information is stored and 
accessible to marketers like myself. Sometimes the sheer enormity of how best 
to slice and dice that data into useable and useful chunks can seem as daunting 
as reading War and Peace.

But imagine if, as their customers, we more proactively shared what we wanted. 
What we needed. And worked more collaboratively to co-create so that all our 
hard earned cash was more effectively put to use. We could post big flashing 
signals that help clarify the life-changing moments from the red herrings.

Brands, large and small, are more open to listening to us than they’ve ever 
been. The market place is simply so noisy that they need a little more help. 
They’re also more regulated and more conscious of managing all our personal 
details. And yet many of us are still afraid of sharing some of our most basic 
stats with brands that we’ve been loyal to for years.

Rather than bemoaning substandard customer service, ads that creepily follow 
us around the net and products that just don’t do what they say on the tin, 
let’s tell these brands where they’re going wrong. Directly, rather than to all 
our friends and family. Or under our breath to the commuters around us. 
Ultimately, it saves everyone time and money. So speak out people. As 
customers, it’s our time.

Aimee Bryan is planning partner at RAPP UK <http://www.rapp.com/>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
