
As a medical student, I volunteered for lots of drug trials to make extra 
money. I sold my blood, my sperm – I did them all. You’re more likely to get 
hurt on the way to the trial unit than as a participant. After I graduated, I 
worked as a junior doctor in hospitals before joining a private drugs company 
that ran trials. I was promoted to principal investigator, the doctor in charge.

I had been involved in more than 300 trials by March 2006 when I was put in 
charge of testing a new drug in the private wing of Northwick Park hospital in 
north London.

Eight young, healthy men were the first humans to receive a new leukaemia 
drug. It was what we call a first-in-man trial. Six received the active drug 
and two a placebo. The dose was given to each man via an IV at 10-minute 
intervals. None of us knew who was getting the placebo.

After I’d given the dose to the seventh man, a nurse told me one of the men 
had a headache, which is common. While dosing the eighth, the nurse returned 
and told me that the first man was feeling worse and that a second was throwing 
up. Then they tumbled like dominoes. One man tried to walk to the toilet and 
collapsed. The wards became chaotic, with blood, vomit, and staff and patients 
shouting. It was clear which two had been given the placebos.

I couldn’t reach the medical registrar and felt stranded. I ended up running 
down two flights of stairs to the intensive care unit and grabbing the first 
two doctors I saw.

Meanwhile, the men were getting worse. Their bodies were in shock. They had 
bright red faces and raging fevers. Their limbs were swelling and their blood 
pressure dropping. The doctors administered anti-inflammatory drugs and fluids. 
The men all had multiple organ failure. Someone said it looked as though one 
man might die, and that I might be charged with manslaughter. I felt completely 
out of control.

The men got worse until around 7pm, when they finally stabilised. I kept going 
back to read the document that detailed everything known about the drug. It 
mentioned the unlikely possibility of a cytokine storm, an extreme immune 
reaction. It was clear that this was what had happened. I stayed in intensive 
care with the men all night.

In the morning, the story was all over the front pages. Somebody had used the 
words “elephant man”, after seeing the swollen face and body of one of the 
patients. It became a headline that stuck.

A few days later, I was told I couldn’t go into my office because the police 
had sealed off my desk and bin. The health secretary called for an official 
investigation. People were looking for someone to blame, an idiot who had given 
the wrong dose. But everything we did had followed protocol. The test had been 
approved by the government regulator, the medicine and healthcare products 
regulatory agency, and an ethics committee. If you knew what was going to 
happen, you wouldn’t need to do it. That’s why you do trials.

Related: Experience: I donated half my liver to my father 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/05/experience-donated-half-my-liver-to-my-father>

I am proud of the way the team kept the men alive. We could have had six 
corpses. One man had to stay in hospital for a couple of months, and another 
was kept in for a few weeks; the other four were stable after about 10 days. 
The worst affected patient lost his fingers and toes, and they were all told 
they could be more likely to develop other diseases in the future. The 
investigation, theDuff Report 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1702450/>, took several months. It 
found no negligence, but made 22 recommendations. Laws have changed around the 
world as a result of this trial. You can’t dose all the volunteers in one day 
any more. 

That was the last first-in-man trial I did. As doctors, we swear to do no 
harm. I felt guilty every day for years. I told myself I should have given 
lower doses, I should have somehow known they were too high. But other doctors 
told me it could as easily have been them.

I have thought about the men a lot in the 10 years since. I would love to know 
how they are, but I don’t think they would want to hear from me. I’d like to 
look them in the eye and say sorry.

• As told to Amalia Illgner

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>.
