
The field is the stuff of aid worker dreams, the place where reasonable 
reminiscing goes to die as another ageing misfit, mercenary or missionary 
regales you with the time they spent dodging landmines in lower east Mondovia 
back when that place was really interesting. And the “site visit” is the holy 
grail of fieldwork; a time to see your hard work putting together that lollipop 
factory grant pay off.

It’s also when those headquarters people get a chance to understand the work 
that you do; when they’ll ride along to see what good the lollipop 
manufacturing has done for the people of outer Mondovia, because it’s time to 
take a look at a country that needs lollipop manufacturing capacity.

Site visits are one of those things you know you need to do, but their success 
is tough to quantify. Like all good measures of effectiveness, we’ll keep this 
simple with a “win/lose” rating for key points during the visit. Before you 
leave, go ahead and score the reasons for the site visit.

Reason 1: Your donor’s aware of a possible audit and has asked that you verify 
some of the more important sites in your portfolio. The Lollipop Manufacturing 
Company of Mondovia is pretty high on that list.

Win: Put this one in the “win” column because it means the people who sign 
your cheques know what it is they pay you to do.

Lose: If it turns out there’s actually a really good reason for that audit and 
the inspector general wants to talk to you about some things.

Related: Five things every aid worker can learn from Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/17/game-of-thrones-lessons-for-aid-workers>

Reason 2: A team from headquarters is here, and they’ve asked to see the 
lollipop factory, because one of the visitors did something similar in Mondovia 
before the third civil war, and they’d love to see the progress you’ve made.

Win: If the people from home office are senior enough. 

Lose: If it’s the same home office backstop that never shuts up about that 
time she almost married a Sudanese warlord.

Reason 3: You’ve been cooped up in residence for months, and thanks to spotty 
internet you’re not getting your usual fix of Pretty Little Liars, and so it’s 
time to get out and see the countryside.

Win: Score one for getting out of the house.

Lose: You watch Pretty Little Liars. Shame.

Now that you’re out and about, time to score the visit itself. 

If security was against it: Security didn’t recommend the trip, but also 
didn’t want to tell you it was too dangerous to go, so you went anyway. Now’s 
your chance to prove to that ex-special forces medic that you know way more 
about outer Mondovia’s people than he ever could. This one can go a few 
different ways...

Win: Win all around if the trip goes well and everyone makes it back safely.

Lose/win/win: You get kidnapped (lose), survive the rescue (win), and Angelina 
Jolie plays you in the movie that gets picked up and re-broadcast on the Oprah 
Winfrey Network (huge win).

Lose/lose/win: Same scenario, except this time you don’t survive the rescue 
attempt. It guarantees Angie’s going to star in the film and there’s been talk 
of it getting picked up by Netflix (you, or your estate, win again).

If you can’t find the lollipop factory: No need to worry, it’s not the sort of 
thing you’ll lose your job over, since competence is not one of the aid worker 
virtues. Time to pack your bags because there’s a long string of promotions in 
your future.

Win: You figure out a way to blame the security team. Headquarters people 
don’t really trust ex-military types anyway.

Lose: See above under “kidnap”, since no one wants a script about people 
kidnapped while they were lost. Unless this is Narnia.

Related: Eleven rules to live by if you want to make it to the top at the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/29/eleven-rules-to-live-by-if-you-want-to-make-it-to-the-top-at-the-un>

If you find the factory: This is it – time for that aid worker money shot. And 
a chance for you to figure out once and for all if this visit’s going to be a 
success.

Win: Any pictures of young children leading you around by the hand on your 
tour of the site.

Lose: Any shot of young children making lollipops at the lollipop factory. 
“Bring your kid so they can work day” is going to be tough to explain to the 
auditors.

Bonus round: Some of the elders have gathered at the lollipop factory to 
express their gratitude for all the fine work you’ve done. If you can get some 
pics of elders with lollipopsand children? Preferably girls? You’re about to be 
aid famous and make the blog page!

Win: Shots of headquarters personnel intently listening to the local elder 
explain how many jobs the lollipop factory has brought to his village.

Lose: Turns out said elder is the area pimp and he wants to tell you that his 
“workers” like the lollipops very much.

Gary Owen is a veteran development worker and blogger at Sunny in Kabul 
<https://sunnyinkabul.com/>. Follow him on Twitter @elsnarkistani 
<mailto:@ElSnarkistani>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
