
Crossing borders is more than a physical act. It is a mental and emotional one 
which involves tremendous challenges to the aid worker.

We must leave our partner and family, friends and familiar surroundings 
behind, and cope with a barrage of new pressures and demands. You learn as you 
go, on the job training, the languages, the culture, differing value systems 
and world views. Time brings answers, you get acclimatised, find your way 
around, make friends, get to know the local shops, from time to time find 
familiar products you longed for that say “home” and settle in.

But there is always a deeper, more visceral challenge, like something that 
lurks in a dark corner, slightly out of focus, needing definition, that gnaws 
at you. After all, you are faced with the reality of life in its most desperate 
forms, corruption, neglected and disenfranchised populations, conflict, 
senseless killing and mayhem, irrational behaviours, starvation, disease and 
death to name just a few.

I realised that the challenge had to be to transform my own sense of 
hopelessness into positive action

When I began supervising a project for the rehabilitation of malnourished 
children in the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s capital Kinshasa, then 
Zaire, I was faced every day with the hopelessness of children brought in after 
failed attempts by traditional healers from the village to our health units. I 
watched these children, like flickering bulbs slowly extinguishing their light, 
gradually fade. I used to return home and cry, the weight of visions of these 
poor victims, victims to ignorance and corruption was too much.

After those three years I was no longer the same person with the same heart 
and mind, I was immutably changed forever. I poured myself into my work, 
devoting all my energies to bring positive change. If I wanted to draw my focus 
and energies away from the misery, I realised that the challenge had to be to 
bring change and in doing so transform my own emotional interpretation of 
hopelessness into positive action. The years passed, the project grew and began 
to be recognised, and my initial bewilderment turned to success.

But the challenge of work was only one of the pressures I faced. Above all, 
living far away from my family, I still had to face loneliness, a void that 
necessitated filling. I found that having at least one task a day, outside of 
work enabled me to “look forward” with anticipation to something that would 
bring me illumination, and satisfaction. It could be something as banal as 
buying Belgian chocolate bars at the corner shop and engaging the cashier and 
staff in the local language.

Related: Secret aid worker: development work broke a piece of me 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/04/secret-aid-worker-development-work-broke-a-piece-of-me>

I once read a psychological study about loneliness and how many people 
frequented supermarkets, airports, train stations just to be among the crowds. 
There was no lack of open markets in Africa, and weekly visits to stock up my 
cupboards, to chat and just hunt around filled that void.

When a Belgian supermarket opened up near my house in Kinshasa, I used to 
frequent it two or three times a week, especially on the weekends which were 
the loneliest time for me. I would spend hours going up and down the aisle, 
buying a bit here and there just to justify my presence. But sometimes as I 
pushed the cart down an aisle filled with laughing families, especially expats 
married to local women and their extended family, I would be overwhelmed with 
loneliness, and wonder how I was going to get through it all. This was usually 
the moment I would call home; hearing the voices of my wife and children would 
get me through.

I found it best to keep busy to keep my mind off my own needs. I would get 
into the jeep on Sunday afternoons, the worst time for me and just cruise up 
and down the streets, along the river and quiet parts of the city, getting the 
air and release from my cabin fever.

Related: Secret Aid Worker: After years in the field, I've lost my compassion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/28/secret-aid-worker-after-years-in-the-field-i-worry-ive-lost-my-compassion>

Finally, having adjusted to the sadness of my task by bringing positive 
change, and my loneliness by both doing things that relieve the pressure and 
also by using wonderful modern technology, the ability to Skype and see your 
family ten thousand miles away, I realised that I was home. As the African 
adage says, “a man must be like a flowering pole, he must grow wherever he is 
planted”. I had put down roots and grown, roots far deeper than I imagined.

 After 30 years I now understand the words that a character in Ben Okri’s The 
Famished Road says to the white man who complains he hasn’t been able to leave 
Africa: you can get out of Africa, when you can get Africa out of you. That is 
the ultimate response to the question of how do you deal with the sadness, 
loneliness, alienation of working in the humanitarian field in a foreign land. 
You absorb it as it, in turn, absorbs you.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially at globaldevpros@theguardian.com - please put SecretAid 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> Worker in the subject line.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
