
It’s the bread and butter of TV stations and newspapers, magazines and radio 
stations. It’s turned brands into household names and become the wallpaper of 
our lives. But advertising is changing. As brands switch to lower-cost digital 
media to get their messages across and advertising through “traditional” media 
undergoes a crisis of confidence, a once hugely profitable industry is feeling 
the crunch.

So how will advertising agencies evolve and ensure they continue to act in the 
best interests of their clients, the brands? To discuss the future of agencies, 
the Guardian, supported by enterprise software company Deltek, hosted a seminar 
discussion with leading figures from the worlds of advertising, media and 
brands. They examined some of the most pressing questions about the future of 
advertising and marketing, in front of a participating audience of more than 50 
industry executives.

“You’ve got to recognise that in the agency world we are facing huge 
disruption,” said Cilla Snowball, group chief executive and chair of the UK’s 
biggest advertising agency, AMV BBDO, which creates campaigns for brands such 
as Sainsbury’s, BT, Guinness and Walkers. She said this is an exciting time for 
agencies, as they have many more digital tools available to them – not just to 
connect with consumers but to measure the success of their campaigns.

This has always been a great challenge for ad agencies – to prove that 
creative campaigns boost sales. Do ads really encourage people to buy more 
product? And if so, by how much? Snowball pointed to research from the 
Advertising Association showing that every£1 spent on advertising makes £6 for 
the economy <http://www.adassoc.org.uk/publications/advertising-pays/>. “That 
is a hell of a return,” she told the room. “We are dead in the water if we 
can’t prove the value of everything we do,” she added.

Accountability is a growing issue for agencies, said Ray Kieser, global 
practice director of marketing communications at Deltek. Brands increasingly 
turn to procurement departments to negotiate their contracts with agencies, but 
these departments have been criticised for focusing solely on beating down 
prices.

Ad agencies will have to cut costs

All of which lumps pressure on to agencies to strip out costs. “Agencies have 
never been under more margin pressure,” said Kieser.

In the emerging media landscape, agencies, media owners and brands will need 
to work in close partnership – rather than sticking to the siloed approach that 
currently prevails – to create powerful marketing. “You form a trinity to work 
together for solutions – that’s where you get the best solution and everyone 
sees the best result,” said Zillah Byng-Thorne, chief executive of publisher 
Future PLC.

But there is no simple strategy to achieve this. “There is no one size fits 
all,” she said. “We lose something if we think there is one silver bullet.”

It’s not just the relationship between agencies, media owners and brands 
that’s being recast, however; media buying is also in flux. Over the past two 
or three decades, media executives have walked out of ad agencies to set up 
their own agencies that buy advertising space from media owners. They have 
played a key role in choosing the most effective publications, websites and TV 
shows to reach the desired audiences for brand messages.

But media buying is rapidly becoming automated, significantly reducing human 
input. As Byng-Thorne said: “Media buying is becoming terribly commoditised. We 
should just embrace that.”

One of the benefits external marketing agencies offer to brands is a fresh 
view of their consumers, said Barnaby Dawe, global chief marketing officer at 
food ordering website Just Eat. This business has grown strongly over the past 
10 years and has expanded globally. Dawe said he has seen a huge variety of 
marketing campaigns from the company’s different offices around the world – 
some good and some bad. This has shown him the importance of bringing in 
specialist agencies to give an outside view of in-house skills.

“We are a brand-led organisation but brands get completely institutionalised,” 
said Dawe, who has worked as a marketer for a variety of high-profile brands, 
including Sky. “You find yourself thinking every consumer is constantly waiting 
for the next ad to come out and constantly thinking about Just Eat. But the 
reality is they’re not. What agencies are really good at is providing a fresh 
perspective and helping us understand how we have to stand out and how we have 
to make people sit up and notice. You can’t do that internally.”

Changing role of marketing

The rapidly changing role of marketing will be a huge issue for agencies in 
the coming years – as marketers are appointed by brands and given huge budgets 
to create marketing strategies and hire advertising, media and digital agencies 
to create advertising campaigns.

From the audience, Sarah Jenkins, chief marketing officer at agency Grey 
London, asked: “In this era of brutal accountability, with business results and 
sales metrics at the heart of most board meetings, do you think marketing is 
losing traction in the boardroom or is it about to become more powerful?”

The panel agreed that marketers would increase their status in companies – and 
that this would be positive for the agencies working with them to create 
effective campaigns. It was pointed out that these campaigns would increasingly 
be driven by data.

“Marketers are the biggest investors in understanding data today,” said 
Kieser. “Their power is in the ascendance.” He said one view of the future is 
that the marketer will “own” the customer. “Their roles are expanding to 
reflect their increased importance to the business – which should be a joy for 
[ad agencies], as long as [they] are aligned with that marketer.” He said the 
challenge for ad agencies will be to link data-driven marketing to big, 
engaging, creative ideas that connect with consumers.

Dawe said although marketing is the biggest single budget for Just Eat, he 
could foresee a time when he has to battle for that budget with the company’s 
chief technology officer. Marketing brings in new customers, while the CTO’s 
job is to hold on to those customers by finding innovative ways to keep them 
coming back for more.

“Marketing budgets are so big and are considered the engine of the 
organisation, but I think that will change over time. There are job titles 
being bounced around like chief marketing technology officer, fusing with 
digital, so it is not as straightforward as saying the marketer is king,” he 
said.

Audience member Jess Burley, chief executive of agency M/SIX, said agencies 
would need to change the sorts of people they hire to deal with the 
increasingly digital nature of marketing.

Creativity is just as important as technology

“My favourite hire at the moment is a maths and psychology major. If I can get 
that as a background it is going to be perfect,” she said. “I think we are 
going to change radically in terms of the people that we need and the way we 
respond to briefs.”

But she added the caveat that it was vital not to get too carried away with 
data and digital technology, as agencies need to produce creative “magic” 
alongside all the technical and measurable things they do.

Audience member Willem van der Horst, who runs marketing strategy consultancy 
Ice Cream For Everyone, asked whether agencies need to be increasingly 
specialist or could maintain their generalist outlook on marketing.

Byng-Thorne said it’s important for agencies to provide a broad brush 
approach. “We should resist a desire to always quantify everything and respect 
sometimes that there is a bit of trust in the relationship, so we need 
specialists but there is merit in generalism as well. Agencies need to do both.”

Suki Thompson, chief executive and co-founder of Oystercatchers, which matches 
clients and agencies, summed up the speed of change facing the agency world: 
“We know that the change is so acute and change and transformation has gone at 
such a rate that whatever we know today will change tomorrow.” But she added: 
“The fundamentals of marketing are the same as they have been forever – the big 
idea, the creativity and the people are just as important.”

Snowball said the agency of the future will be much more democratic and less 
hierarchical as it develops structures to help it work faster. Agencies today 
have to achieve in hours what they used to do over weeks. “There’s huge change 
but the success of the agency model relies on great, effective ideas and 
brilliant talent that adds value. It’s this combination that gives you a good 
agency.”

Agencies will need to boost their digital skills and probably get used to 
lower margins. But they will have to excel in their core skills of 
understanding consumers, creating big ideas and bringing fresh and insightful 
views of the world to marketing departments. Snowball summed up the challenge 
for agencies: “You have to evolve and stay ahead of all those challenges.”

On the panel

 * Suki Thompson (Chair) Chief executive and founding partner Oystercatchers 

 * Cilla Snowball Group chair and group chief executive, AMV BBDO

 * Raymond Kieser Global practice director of marketing communications, Deltek

 * Barnaby Dawe Global CMO, Just Eat

 * Zillah Byng-Thorne, CEO, Future PLC
