
For the past five years, Grant Thornton has carried out an annual independent 
analysis and review of the financial health of the UK higher education sector. 
This year’s review,Thrive or survive? 
<http://www.grant-thornton.co.uk/Global/Financial%20health%20of%20the%20higher%20education%20sector%202015%20FINAL.pdf>
, highlights the current financial stability of the sector, but also advocates 
the need for change to meet the challenges of a rapidly changing world.

Our analysis shows that universities have continued to benefit from the 
additional funding derived from the introduction of income contingent student 
loans, as well as from capital development previously funded by the government. 
This has been particularly beneficial to the newer universities and has 
resulted in strong balance sheets, large cash balances. In the view of the
Higher Education Funding Council for England <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/>, the 
sector is in a stable overall financial position.

However, some of the challenges from the past remain and, with the speed of 
change, some are increasing in importance. Institutions that grow and thrive 
will do so because they have planned to adapt for the future and will 
inevitably look very different from the past. For others, the future is far 
less certain.


The future of higher education will be shaped by a number of different 
factors, including the demands and expectations of students; collaboration with 
industry and commercial organisations, both for research and to meet the skills 
and requirements of employers; the ability of institutions to react quickly to 
changes and to operate globally as well as in the UK; the free movement of 
students and academics around the world; and by different, more wide-ranging 
forms of both competition and collaboration.


Some of the most important drivers will include:


The attitude and perception of students

Students now incur significant personal debt so those considering higher 
education place increasing emphasis on getting a return on their investment. 
Universities will need to provide prospective students with accurate data and 
clarity in their messages.

A significant dependence on overseas students 

The increasing numbers of overseas students in UK universities has been 
welcomed, but factors outside the control of universities could cause a shift 
that could leave those dependent on overseas students exposed. International 
and domestic political pressures mean the net immigration of students could 
change quickly, while global competition for students is intensifying. We are 
also likely to see a rising trend for UK students to undertake their studies 
overseas. The increased global mobility of students has the potential to create 
devastating effects on institutions overly reliant on international students.

Technology and digital changes 

The evolution of massive open online courses (MOOCs) continues and has now 
entered a phase of experimentation and foundation-building, with change 
occurring slowly and steadily, largely under the media radar.


The rise of alternative providers 

We have seen developments in this area over the past few years, but the 
removal of the student number control, the option of lower cost courses and, in 
some instances, closer links with future employers, may make alternative 
providers increasingly attractive to students. For some institutions increased 
competition may result in a decline in student numbers and a need for 
significant and timely restructuring, if they are to remain sustainable.

Good governance 

The pressures on university management and leadership teams, including 
non-executive board members, will intensify. Governance will need to evolve to 
ensure that informed and effective decisions are made.

Financial sustainability 

All these changes are likely to impose significant financial pressures on 
individual institutions, in addition to inflation capped student fees on UK/EU 
students, rising staff costs and increasing pension liabilities, and capital 
and maintenance costs that will now rest with the institution as opposed to 
being publicly funded through the Exchequer.

It is an obvious and easy statement to make – even if it is more challenging 
to deliver in practice – that institutions need to maximise their income from 
commercial sources, alumni and other philanthropic donors, as well as managing 
their costs effectively.

Future perspectives

How universities might look in the future is dependent on a whole range of 
factors, but the most significant factor is technological and digital change.

We anticipate a landscape of fewer but financially stronger institutions, some 
being real global players. There will also be a clearer divide between those 
institutions that carry out research, those that specialise in academic and 
other specialist teaching and those that provide vocational and skills based 
training qualifications.

Such a framework will provide better choice for students, meet the 
requirements for world class research and offer resulting benefits to society 
and to our economy by fulfilling employers demands for workforce skills.


David Barnes is head of higher education at Grant Thornton

To receive a copy of our latest financial health review, please contact 
louise.hughes@uk.gt.com <mailto:louise.hughes@uk.gt.com>.

