
I am kneeling with my arm half buried in a bed of soil so good I am almost 
tempted to steal some. I’ve found my way here by a series of texts and a brief 
meeting in a pub, followed by instructions that, “you can’t miss the garden 
because it’s up on the hill on the left after the wood”. I already know that I 
am going to love it.

Neil Cameron has lived on Jura for 15 or so years with his partner Katrina, 
and together they have gardened on a windswept hill where there is very little 
soil under all that wild sod. One of their many achievements is to have 
reconstructed the lazy beds system of growing (pictured) that was once widely 
used in the Hebrides, as well as in Ireland. Lazy beds are hardly that – they 
take effort to build – but the rewards are fertile, rich soil that’s so soft 
and kind, you want to bury yourself in it. You mound up the beds to create a 
good root run, to raise your crops away from wet, sodden soil and to allow the 
soil to warm up quickly in spring. They look much like ridge-and-furrow 
drainage systems, and it’s possible to spot old lazy beds wherever human 
habitation has occurred in these isles.

There are various ways to make these beds. Thanks to YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=lazy+beds>, you can while away 
your tea break observing the details, but essentially you mark out your bed, 
then fold in the turf, so it’s turned on its head, then mound up the rest 
of the bed with seaweed and, in Cameron’s case, a thick blanket of bracken. The 
bed is then covered with black plastic and left to rot down for a season or two.

There are quicker versions for potato growing. Here, you mark your bed, mow 
off the grass, cover the bed with a layer of cardboard, grass clippings, 
seaweed or just weeds, and place out your seed potatoes. The you cut the turf, 
folding it over to cover the tatties. In the modern version, you cover the seed 
potatoes with a mixture of organic matter, whether it’s straw, homemade compost 
or grass clippings, and keep adding to it over the growing season. That said, 
you must take great care to ensure that the blanket of organic matter is thick 
enough, otherwise your potatoes will turn green as they are exposed to light. 
For this reason, some people cover the beds with perforated plastic, but this 
does make it a bit of a mecca for slugs.

Cameron’s ground is so wet that he mulches the paths by the beds with a thick 
layer of bracken, so he can walk around them in winter without getting bogged 
down. He continues to add to his beds with a new layer of bracken or seaweed as 
he sees fit. And up his beds rise, thick with fertility and strength.

Free organic matter is key. I am far too landlocked for seaweed, though 
Cameron did kindly offer up a bag of rotted and sieved seaweed, and suggested I 
wear all my clothes home to make room for it in my luggage. However, there are 
plenty of us who do live near free, washed-up seaweed to collect in winter, or 
bracken to cut in autumn. Beds this good are worth the effort.
