
Tuberculosis (TB) is a complex and difficult disease. That is why the fight 
against this age-old affliction has not been won. It is highly infectious and 
if left undiagnosed and untreated, puts our employees and our local communities 
at risk. On 24 March, the global public, private sectors and civil society will 
markWorld TB Day. <http://www.stoptb.org/events/world_tb_day/>

A disease that knows no boundaries

TB has been around for centuries and is prevalent in the developing world and 
disadvantaged communities. Worldwide there are about 9m new TB infections each 
year. Of these, only 6m are properly diagnosed and treated, which means that 3m 
are missed by health systems and do not get the required care. Approximately 
1.3 million people lose their lives to TB each year; 320,000 of these people 
also suffered from Aids. People should not be dying from a curable disease 
today.

That said, TB bacteria are resilient, often remaining alive and airborne for 
several hours in aerosolised droplets from the cough or sneeze of an infected 
person. As confined spaces are ideal breeding grounds, there is little wonder 
that overcrowded and poverty-stricken communities report a high TB incidence 
rate. In southern Africa, where Anglo American has many of its operations, 
disadvantaged communities often live in close quarters to the mines with little 
sanitation and poor nutrition. As a result, TB thrives, often going undetected 
and untreated for a long time.

Tip of the iceberg

TB is difficult to diagnose as it can manifest in the human body in a number 
of ways. A particular problem is that of latent infection – approximately two 
thirds of the South African adult population have been infected with TB at some 
stage in their life, but have controlled the infection through an effective 
immune response. A small proportion of those infected will progress to active 
TB disease, but it is difficult to separate these few out by conventional 
means. In disadvantaged settings, a person with pulmonary TB is likely to 
infect 10 others before he or she is diagnosed and treated.

Medication to cure TB requires strict adherence for a six-month course of 
treatment. Poor adherence could cause the treatment to fail altogether or 
result in Multi-Drug Resistant (MDR) TB. Worldwide about 500,000 people develop 
MDR TB each year and only one in four of these sufferers are diagnosed and 
properly treated. The MDR TB treatment programme is prolonged, expensive and 
difficult, often with disabling side effects from toxic drugs.

MDR TB is a huge threat worldwide and we have to stop it now. That means no 
failures in finding, treating and curing TB in populations at high risk – a 
massive improvement in performance is required. We must reach the missing 3 
million people and ensure they receive quality care. And this is only the tip 
of the iceberg.

The face of Aids

The face of Aids in southern Africa is TB – the most common opportunistic 
infection that affects people living with HIV. Since the onset of the HIV/Aids 
epidemic, the incidence of TB has escalated dramatically. Among the 22 high TB 
burden countries that account for 80% of the world's TB cases, South Africa has 
the highest incidence of TB infection and the highest burden of TB/HIV 
co-infection. Contrary to the worldwide trend of falling TB incidence, the rate 
of new infection in South Africa has been increasing. Only recently, with the 
scaling up of effective antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection, are there 
signs that the country will be able to reverse the trend.

Digging deeper

TB is an acute problem in the mining sector, because occupational lung disease 
in the form of silicosis predisposes affected individuals to TB infection.

The World Bank cites the following statistics to demonstrate how mineworkers 
are exposed to multiple factors that compound their risk of TB infection:

• Mineworkers are at twice the risk of the general population, because of 
migrant labour.
• Mineworkers with HIV face three times the risk.
• Mineworkers with silicosis are at six times the risk.
• Mineworkers with silicosis and HIV are at 18 times the risk.

Mining companies have to work hard to eliminate all of these risk factors if 
they want to make progress in stopping TB. At Anglo American's current mines, 
we have reduced the incidence of silicosis to almost zero. Great attention is 
paid to the living conditions of employees and our HIV prevention and treatment 
programmes are at the leading edge of current practice.

Finding treatments and systems that work 

In the longer term, we need an effective TB vaccine, improved diagnostics and 
better medicines. While we wait for these developments, we need to work towards 
a population-based prevention and treatment plan using the tools we have got. 
We cannot simply rely on individuals to present with TB in the early stages of 
active disease; we have to go out and look for TB if we are going to catch it 
in time.

Improving performance in TB management requires much better health information 
systems and electronic patient records. It is time to use the new information 
technologies available today to help standardise TB management and treatment 
protocols, to ensure adherence and to secure complete follow up in all cases.

By using cloud-based information technology, the difficulties with referral of 
patients from one treatment site to another distant site can also be overcome. 
Anglo American's Dr Jan Pienaar has developed such a system called 
"theHealthSource". The use of this system in HIV and TB management has been a 
major contributor to bringing the TB incidence at our Thermal Coal mines down 
from 937 per 100,000 population in 2006 to 340 per 100,000 in 2013. We are 
seeking to share this system widely within the mining industry and with 
government health services as a significant contribution towards managing the 
TB and HIV epidemics in Southern Africa.

Another area of strategic focus for us is strengthening healthcare systems in 
under-serviced rural areas and building partnerships to improve access to 
quality healthcare. Anglo American has been a strong supporter of theGlobal Fund
 <http://www.theglobalfund.org> to fight Aids, TB and Malaria since its 
inception. The World Health Organisation-hostedStop TB <http://www.stoptb.org> 
partnership is also making massive strides in awakening governments, the 
private sector and civil society to the pandemic. In the search for an 
effective TB vaccine, we are working withAERAS <http://www.aeras.org>, a 
non-profit biotech that is bringing new vaccine candidates to clinical trial.

However, we must do better. Although Anglo American's TB incidence rate is in 
line with the national average in South Africa, this is still not good enough.

Game plan: get everything right. This means stepping up TB and HIV case 
detection, initiating early treatment, ensuring adherence, tracing contacts, 
improving living conditions, mitigating the detrimental social consequences of 
migrant labour, ensuring cross-border continuity of care and harmonising 
treatment protocols across multiple different health service providers.

In this day and age, there is no reason why people should be dying of TB. With 
early diagnosis and early, effective treatment for both HIV and TB, supported 
by an integrated health information and management system and with continuity 
of personalised care, it can be beaten.

Copy on this page is provided by Anglo American, sponsor of the social impact 
hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/social-impact?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
