
A new BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> documentary series will look 
at hate crimes in the US, including the murder of a transgender woman by her 
boyfriend and a Texan man killed for being gay.

The three-part BBC3 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc3> series, Love and 
Hate Crime, is part of a new season of BBC documentaries announced on Monday 
including a week-long study of one of London’s biggest hospital trusts, an 
insight into parents in prison and a feature about Sir Chris Hoy.

The BBC said Love and Hate Crime, commissioned before the weekend’s Orlando 
shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/orlando-victims-travel-agent-brand-manager-and-technician-among-dead>
, will look at the dangers facing those who are singled out as “different” in 
the US.

It will look at the killing of a transgender woman killed by her boyfriend, 
who claimed the shock of finding out his partner had been born male made him 
lose control and kill her.

It will explore another case of a young man from Texas killed for being gay by 
his own boyfriend’s family, while a third film will look at how two white 
teenage girls from Mississippi on a night out ended up taking part in a 
race-hate killing.

“By interviewing police, prosecutors, perpetrators and those close to the 
victims, these films will unravel the mystery of what really happened in each 
of these unfolding cases,” said the BBC, announcing the documentaries in the 
run-up to this year’s Sheffield documentary festival.

“They will explore the psychology and motivation of those involved and the 
consequences for the communities they come from.”

Other new commissions include BBC1’s My Parent’s in Prison, made by Brian 
Woods about children who have a mum or dad behind bars, a figure which is 
growing.

BBC2’s The Hospital: Life and Death in a Week will look at the pressures on 
the NHS as told through a week at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
following patients from first admittance to when they are discharged.

Sir Chris Hoy: From Velodrome to Le Mans, also for BBC2, will follow the 
Olympic cycling champion as he purses his dream of competing in the Le Mans 24 
Hour race.

A BBC4 documentary, Surviving Aberfan, will look back, 50 years on, at the 
south Wales tragedy, the worst disaster involving children in modern British 
history.

Patrick Holland, BBC head of commissioning, documentaries, said: “I want the 
BBC to be the place where the most exciting and acclaimed documentary 
film-makers in the UK can come and do their very best work.

“The new series and singles we are announcing today use a range of film-making 
techniques offering unique and privileged access to some extraordinary stories.”
