
I look at the leek and elephant garlic seedheads that are toppling over, and 
eye up the snapped-off poppy seedheads and other bleached bits of growth. There 
are many house-beautiful webs made by the garden spider (Araneus diadematus 
<http://srs.britishspiders.org.uk/portal.php/p/Summary/s/Araneus+diadematus>), 
with their distinct cross on their backs. The frost will kill off these spiders 
and with them take down much of the rest of the garden.

The garden is a dishevelled mess and I contemplate tidying it up a bit, but at 
this point in the season this is an act of mere vanity. We now know that all 
those tired brown stems are essential for wildlife – in particular, the broken 
and not so pretty ones. During the coming month the poppy seedheads will tumble 
and some of the globe artichoke heads will fall as the stems rot. Others will 
stand proudly, of course, but in my experience those that lie horizontal are 
the ones that are colonised quickly by other life.

Some creatures may move into the hollow stem and sleep there over the winter. 
Others may make them the roofs of their subterranean homes. Moulds, mildews and 
fungi will start to break down the tough lignin of these stems. But before 
these rot back into the soil, others will feed off those fungi and moulds.

Clearing up the garden now is disastrous, yet it is deep within our gardening 
culture. We all have an urge to tidy away anything that is less than 
aesthetically pleasing, but the health of next year’s garden lies in all that 
is not so appealing.

Some sort of compromise is needed. A deep litter of rotting material on the 
crowns of many perennials is not ideal. It can cause winter rot and will 
encourage slugs to linger. I tend to clear away this sort gently. On the 
allotment, I sweep up autumn leaves from the paths to turn intoleaf mould 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/06/alys-fowler-leaf-mould>, 
but in the garden – where this task is not so easy – I squirrel leaves under 
shrubs and roses, where they can rot down and make an excellent insect habitat 
as they do.

If you feel the need to clear away toppled stems (and I understand if you do), 
gather them into a rough bundle and hide them under a shrub or beside the 
compost bin, where any creature can make them its winter residence. If you can, 
place some much higher off the ground; perhaps hide a bundle in an evergreen 
shrub or tuck them under the eaves of the shed. Not everyone wants to remain on 
the ground all winter.

The rest is an exercise in restraint. Those stems and dead bits need to be 
left not only for winter but also into the early spring. When a flock of 
goldfinches descends on your verbena seedheads or a queen bumble emerging from 
her winter sleep, and when the garden becomes animated because it is full of 
life, rather than because it is tidy, you’ll see your purpose more clearly.

@AlysFowler <https://twitter.com/alysfowler>
