
I was leaving my fourth period class at Helena high school in Montana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/montana>, getting ready to go to lunch 
with a friend when one of my vice-principals stopped me in the hallway.


“Did you forget something today?” she said. “I need to talk to you about your 
inappropriate attire.”

It was 25 May. At the time, I was wearing a black T-shirt that was off the 
shoulder, which is not against the school’s dress code. So I was surprised when 
the vice-principal asked me if I had forgotten an article of clothing.

“No,” I responded, confused.

“Are you wearing a bra?” she continued. 

“No,” I replied. 

“Well, you need to either cover up or put one on, because there are a lot of 
male teachers and male students here, and that makes them uncomfortable. They 
don’t want to see that.”

I felt embarrassed. I felt almost violated. You couldn’t even really tell I 
wasn’t wearing a bra. Even if I bent over, you couldn’t see anything. I would 
not have worn the shirt if you could. I’m not about showing everything off – 
that’s just not me.

I choose not to wear a bra very often, because I find it more comfortable. 
Most of my friends never wear bras, either. I was really thrown off by the 
vice-principal’s comments, so I told her I would put something different on and 
left.

But later, I looked in the handbook, and I saw there was nothing in there 
about bras, except that your bra strap can’t be showing. That obviously wasn’t 
a problem for me.

I posted about it on my Snapchat, and a ton of people contacted me. Everyone 
was mad. One of my friends texted me suggesting we organize a “no bra day” as 
soon as possible.

A lot of people supported us, and it was simple. All we planned to do was go 
to school bra-less. We didn’t want to harm anybody. We didn’t want to make the 
administration upset. It was for us.

It was about gender equality and teaching people not to sexualize women’s 
bodies. We’re always asked to do things to make guys more comfortable. If my 
boobs make you uncomfortable, then why are you looking at me in that way?

This was to show girls that they can be comfortable with their bodies without 
worrying about making someone else uncomfortable.

I wasn’t doing it for attention, and I did not expect that it would get so big.

On 27 May, we went to school without our bras, and a lot of teachers and 
students were talking about it.

I got pulled into the principal’s office four times that day. In one of the 
meetings, the principal asked me to take down our Facebook page, telling me it 
was a distraction to people’s learning, and it was getting out of hand.

I was super frustrated, because he was the one distracting from my learning by 
making me meet with him during class – all because we weren’t wearing bras. He 
wasn’t understanding the point of what we were doing. I tried to explain that 
we were standing up for ourselves and that I have freedom of speech and 
expression.

I walked out crying, because I was just so mad.

My friend told me that a local news station had showed up and wanted to talk, 
and I was so upset at the time, I thought: why not?

Related: Should you stop wearing a bra? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/22/dillner-should-i-go-braless>

Once it was on the news in Helena, it spread on Facebook and other news 
stations and just blew up.

I had people from as far as the UK, France and India contact me. And I’ve had 
a lot of awful comments. I’ve been called every name in the book. People have 
sent me messages saying “kill yourself”, “you’re a huge whore”, “no one wants 
to see your boobs”. Some said I’m just an “attention seeker”.

I have a pretty thick skin, but I don’t look at the comments any more.

It’s gotten huge, and I’m extremely thankful that the word has gotten out. But 
I don’t want the focus to be on the bra any more.

This is about ending body shaming. This is about ending double standards for 
girls.

It started with me, but it’s not about me. It’s about women everywhere being 
able to be comfortable in their own bodies.
