
It’s summer term: season of exams, light evenings and – for many year 12s – 
university open days. With fashionable courses from psychology to sports 
science beckoning, how many applicants will resist their lure and choose those 
beleaguered Cinderella subjects, languages?

On current trends, few. The story of the decline of modern languages in UK 
universities is as familiar as the fact that Madame Marsaud was alwaysdans la 
cuisine in the textbooks: the numbers taking modern foreign language degree 
courses fell 16% between 2007-08 and 2013-14.

The numbers stabilised last year, yet a new blow seems to land weekly: this 
month, the OCR exam board announced it is to discontinue GCSEs and A-levels in 
French, German and Spanish. The latest annual Language Trends report, 
meanwhile, found schools are not preparing for more GCSE or A-level language 
entries despite the new Ebacc – intended to see 90% of pupils take a suite of 
five core GCSEs including a language by 2020.

With school languages deep in the doldrums, and new initiatives, including 
primary school language study, yet to feed through, what can universities do to 
keep departments viable and the subjects alive? If students with language 
skills are no longer there, where can teaching the subject even begin?

Related: Applying to university: what the savvy sixth former is asking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/23/apply-university-sixth-former-guardian-university-guide>

One answer, it appears, is at the beginning. Though it’s difficult to detect 
in admissions statistics, university language courses are changing, with more 
opportunities for students to study a language from scratch.Ab initio courses, 
as they are termed, once the preserve of Russian, Chinese and Arabic, are now 
being extended to include more familiar languages: Spanish, sometimes French 
and especially German. In some universities, such courses are long established, 
but others are making new forays: Oxford offered beginners’ German for the 
first time this year (available in joint honours to students with an A-level in 
another language); King’s College London, went further and this year offered 
German from scratch with a range of subjects. Manchester has introduced French 
from scratch – plus the chance to add a language as a minor degree subject.

For Lauren Valentine, 19, completing the first year of a single honours French 
degree at Manchester, the university’s new “flexible honours” programme has 
allowed her to fulfil her dream of learning Spanish, foiled when her school 
split her year into two random language groups and she ended up with French. “I 
was always embarrassed on family holidays when all I could say wasuna cola lite
,” she says. “I couldn’t do Spanish at sixth-form college either, and I didn’t 
have the confidence to apply for joint honours with Spanishab inito because I 
thought it wouldn’t ever be as good as my French.

“We did a lot of intensive grammar in the first year, and I feel that my 
Spanish is now above A-level standard, though the vocab will take more time to 
bed in. The course has given me even more than I’d hoped, and I now want to go 
into translation or interpreting.”

The new Manchester programme, introduced this year and allowing students to 
take a “minor” in a range of subjects including languages, is designed to catch 
students who might not have considered languages, or perhaps lacked the 
confidence to apply to study them at degree level. While the university still 
demands at least one good language A-level for traditional joint honours 
language courses, the minor courses require no prior language experience. This 
year, 30 out of 53 students taking a minor chose a language, and the vast 
majority plan to carry on – with a few even switching to full joint honours.

The scheme allows students to “dip their toe in the subject” for a year 
without risk, says assistant undergraduate director, Joseph McGonagle, and if 
they do continue they can get a language on their degree certificate. “The 
feedback is brilliant – they are grabbing it with both hands.” The hope is to 
double the numbers this September, he says. “This is about rebuilding from a 
low base – or a different base. We can’t let the popularity of school languages 
decline and not address that at university level.”

Related: University guide 2017: university profiles index 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/23/university-guide-2017-university-profiles-index>

Meanwhile at Southampton, another Russell Group institution with a languages 
focus,ab initio courses are longer established. As in most language 
departments, they have an equality function, ensuring linguists who were able 
to take only one language in the sixth form can still take a traditional joint 
honours language degree, according to professor of modern languages Vicky 
Wright. Roughly 10% of applications for a combined degree are from applicants 
with only one language, though it was almost a quarter this year for French and 
Spanish because Spanish – although growing in popularity – is still often not 
available in schools at A-level, and even French is now not always on offer.

George Hope, 22, took only French at A-level, despite German being available. 
But when the language bug struck he applied to take French with accelerated 
Germanab initio at Southampton, and fell in love with the “orderly, structured” 
language, spending his gap year in Freiburg and reaching a level equal to his 
French.

At the moment, he believes, ab initio options are recognised only by those who 
are “looking at languages already, so it isn’t really helping revive languages. 
But it could, if you encourage people applying to university, and say have you 
thought about languages alongside your main subject?”

At Southampton and many universities, the traditional ab initio option 
combining a new language with a known one may not be converting those who 
haven’t considered languages, but it does help counteract the effect of 
declining school language teaching. The dual language A-level student is “an 
endangered species”, according to McGonagle but, says Wright, “against a 
national trend of steady decline, we are holding our own but not increasing”.

At Oxford, ab initio German introduced this year has proved popular, and nine 
students are signed up for September (compared with 70 who have German 
A-level). Beginner students are taught very intensively and therefore their 
numbers will, for now, be capped at 16, says Katrin Kohl, professor of German 
literature.

The new course, Kohl notes, has attracted students drawn to German in diverse 
ways: perhaps through an interest in the economy, through family connections, 
or after reading something influential.

Jocelyn Wyburd, chair of the university council of modern languages and 
director of the language centre at Cambridge, sees the expansion ofab initio as 
“universities grappling with a pipeline problem” – a “woeful” 48% of the GCSE 
cohort last year took at least one language.

A strong fight back by language departments, mainly through the Routes into 
Languages campaign <https://www.routesintolanguages.ac.uk/>, plus government 
initiatives, may ultimately see a turnround in language take-up in the UK. But 
for now, Wyburd says, universities are “reinventing their rules. Each 
department is devising its own pathways and constantly reviewing what are the 
non-negotiables.”

Can ab initio rescue languages? “It can. Will it? I don’t know – I’d love it 
to. But it’s not a panacea.”
