
Some of the things I didn't get before I had T, I now do get. I never totally 
understood the point of children before they could talk. It's totally 
inconsistent because I love dogs, regardless of their skill set. I'd never say 
to a dog owner, "When will it learn not to run into the road?" (Although, pal, 
I do think it.) But my stock questions to parents were, "Can it talk yet?" and 
"When will it start talking?" I could tell they didn't like it, because the 
natural progression was, "When will it start talking sense?", culminating in, 
"When will it be an adult?" Now that I have T, I can remember the sense in my 
former view, but I can also see how one might, not just tolerate, but be 
actively fond of pre-speech infants. Plus, I can see significant downsides to 
children who can talk. I have a total, helicopter view, in other words, it's 
like being able to speak English, Mandarin and Horse.

But I still don't understand all the moaning. Everybody moans, and some of it 
is really tedious. You don't need to be a parent to have a sore leg or a bad 
journey and bore the fingernails off people. And not all moaning is bad; I have 
a friend whose PMT is a dazzling rhetorical tour de force, though if I had to 
live with her, I might grind hysterectomy pills into her hot milk. But the 
moaning of the modern parent has a particular timbre that is pepper-on-eyeballs 
to the non-parent and this, I think, is like herpes: once you have become 
annoyed by it, your annoyance will periodically flare up whether or not you go 
on to have children. I do not have herpes, by the way. I am just imagining what 
it might be like.

You can divide this moaning into two types, the awful self-righteousness and 
the self-righteous over-intellectualising. Let's just imagine, at random, that 
you didn't get enough sleep. This is pretty straightforward: it's either 
children, or a really late night because of booze, or you're an insomniac. 
People with a hang-over might bang on but, however cranky they are, there tends 
to be a rueful self-deprecation, which gives the whole thing charm. A statement 
of weakness is an endearing thing. Insomniacs almost never tell you when 
they've had a bad night, I imagine because the stock response is, "That's 
funny, I sleep like a log/ baby/crocodile." It must be really insufferable.

Parent moaning is never a statement of weakness; it's a statement of 
martyrdom. But what's a martyr really after?

Congratulations? I'm game, but it's hard to get your shoulder behind it. It's 
not like they carved a fascinator from a Coke can, or rehabilitated a hobo. 
Commiserating, too, is hard about something so minor; it's only sleep, they can 
always get more later. It's not like they dislocated a knee or set fire to a 
pigeon up a chimney. And anyway, what they really want is gratitude. I know it. 
They won't say it, but I know they're thinking it, because I am.

When I'm huffing about roadworks outside my house, on some weak-minded fancy 
that they're endangering my first born - when really they're just making my 
clogs muddy - a part of me is thinking, "You should not be making life more 
difficult for me. You should be making it easier, because I'm performing a 
social service." Like I had T to solve the pensions crisis! I know it's bogus, 
but I still stoke it. It's because

the alternative would be to say, "Well, civilisation/person mending Victorian 
drains, you have to help me ... because I need help. Nope, you don't owe it to 
me. I just need it." This would be a lot less annoying, but it would really 
stick in my craw. I'm only managing to type it because it is in inverted commas.

Right, I don't have time to moan about intellectualising. And I only started 
any of this because there's something of a (sure, manufactured, media) backlash 
against "dummy mummies" going on at the moment, which I - incredibly - have a 
view on, but we'll have to do that another day (just to start it off, though, 
the reason I have used parent throughout, rather than mother, is that mothers 
seem to be catching all the shit for self-involved parenting. Whereas I think 
you'll find, if you listen, that fathers also bore on quite a bit). Anyway, too 
tired to do it today. Only joking. I actually get loads of sleep. T sleeps like 
a log/baby/crocodile. He's asleep right now, it's only 7.15pm.
