
I was talking about something - some matter of pressing consequence, can't 
remember what - the other day, when C said from nowhere: "You are very inane in 
your final trimester." He's gone mad, I thought. Maybe he has low blood sugar. 
But then I was telling my friend B about it and he said: "Yeah, he said that to 
us as well" (while M, his girlfriend, went, "I don't think he meant us to 
repeat that, B," and he said, "What? He said it to her as well," and she said, 
"It's a little bit worse when he's saying it to everyone"). If you'll allow me 
to adjudicate, M is right, it is worse - so as some small consolation, we at 
least managed to extend our discord to a second couple. We'll return to this 
later.

There were two things I used to really hate about parents, and now I do both 
of them (the first is a self-righteous aspect in my carriage - I feel we've 
been through that before).

Some people hate the way, in groups, on holiday or wherever, parents suddenly 
have a rigid list of needs and demands ("No, I said we'd make cornflake cakes 
at 9.15," etc). I know someone who objects to stopping just because children 
are hungry (it's a category error: she was looking upon children as small, 
over-indulged adults. Parents look at them more as cars, whose fuel 
requirements are non-negotiable). I never used to mind this; somebody has to 
have a plan, otherwise you just loaf about until it's time to go to the pub. 
And the yardarm gets earlier and earlier until it's as soon as you get up, and 
it's a yardalarm.

What I can't stand is the observational inanity that parents mete out to 
passersby: "Look, look, he's waving at you!" "He said, 'Thank you!'" "Look, his 
shorts are a bit the same as yours, only he's 20 months old! And you're an 
adult!" "I think he just said 'mouse'. He said 'mouse'! He's never even seen a 
mouse!"

I think this is terrible. Decibels have responsibilities: it's OK to bore 
people by accident, but you can't blurt out whatever comes into your head. It's 
disrespectful, a dereliction of duty. I hate it. And now I do it all the time. 
When T waves at a waitress, I am right behind, going, "He's waving! I think he 
really likes you," as if that's as good as a tip. If we walk into some shop 
with incidental music and he starts clapping, I point out his sense of rhythm 
to strangers. I feel nauseous even writing this down; I genuinely make myself 
sick. My parental role model, conversationally, has always been J, who never 
tells you anything at all about her children. You say: "How are the girls?" She 
says: "They are GREAT." And that's the end of it, the emphasis serving the 
double purpose of underlining her maternal love while sealing off the 
conversation. I have modified this, so when people ask after T, I say, "He is a 
MIRACLE", but this is only so as not to plagiarise J. So I'm rigid about this 
when T's not around. Beyond mentioning the major milestones (he walks), I never 
bore on at all (I am not blind to the fact, by the way, that I flush out a fair 
amount of my boring on in the newspaper. Pah). But when he's right there in 
front of me, he seems to befuddle my conversational inhibitions, and I am a 
bore.

Some explanations: this is how you teach them to talk (not very well, 
incidentally - he didn't really say "mouse", or if he did, only once), by just 
blathering away at whatever comes into your head. It would be functionally 
impossible to say only consequential things to a baby. No language holds any 
meaning for them, for one; for two, meaning takes concentration, which is 
concentration you could be spending making sure they don't roll off high 
surfaces; for three, I don't have this on any authority, but it feels as if you 
should be talking all the time, so some of it's bound to be just noise, I ain't 
Kierkegaard. So if my register in T's presence is a constant babble of 
pointless sound, that is bound to extend to the surrounding company, and some 
of the pointless sound is always going to be about T himself.

Or maybe I am inane in my final trimester. This could even be a recognised 
syndrome.
