
Toast, I’m told, was the No 1 food trend in 2015. To which I say, well, that’s 
it, I’m joining a remote tribe with no access to Instagram. Life in the west 
was nice while it lasted. But before I pack my bags, I’ve decided to have a go 
at what Delia calls her “definitive recipe for perfect toast”.

The perfect toast starts with the perfect bread, and you can’t go wrong with 
Delia’s recipe for Quick and Easy Wholemeal Loaf. It is, indeed, quick and 
easy. (I am tempted to make a crude joke at this point, but this is a family 
newspaper.)

Just one minor tweak: Delia likes salt even more than she likes butter, and 
suggests adding two teaspoons of the stuff. You can get a perfectly good loaf 
with just two twists of the salt shaker, or, indeed, as I discovered on the 
second go round, when I forgot to add any salt, no twists at all.

Your bread made, it’s time to start making toast.

Delia is “not a disciple of automatic toasters”, as they are, according to 
Delia, “a bit hit and miss”. To which my immediate response is to say that I 
eat toast shortly after waking up, a time in which many things in my life are 
hit and miss, including my ability to brush my teeth without leaving toothpaste 
on my clothing or to get out of the flat without leaving something behind, so 
at least there’s unity of theme.

But, nevertheless, I persevere. The grill it is, which, Delia says, I need to 
“preheat for at least 10 minutes before making the toast”. Which, frankly, 
feels like an awful lot of preparation for what is meant to be a fairly simple 
breakfast. Most mornings I wake up, put bread in the toaster, get dressed, look 
at the time, panic and leave the house with a half-buttered piece of toast in 
my mouth, or, if it is a bad morning, my coat pocket.

Delia then sets out a very specific set of instructions as to how far from the 
heat source the bread should be. Not for the first time, I begin to suspect 
that Delia has a very different kitchen from my own. I have an electric grill 
and a limited understanding of how it produces heat, let alone where the heat 
comes from. More importantly, short of redesigning my cooker, I don’t have all 
that much control over the location of the bread.

Once the bread is on the grill, Delia commands, “keep an eye on it and don’t 
wander far away”, which means that it looks like I am going to be arriving into 
work naked or late.

Once the toast is done, “remove it immediately to a toast rack”.

I know what you’re thinking. As you are not a hotel, you don’t own a toast 
rack. I don’t either, although Delia recommends I “invest” in one, as they 
allow the steam in the bread to circulate.

My understanding of an investment is that you get a bigger price for what you 
bought when you sell it, something which I think is unlikely to happen to my 
toast rack. But Delia’s right, after a minute resting in the toast rack, it is 
indeed “crisp and crunchy”, although the butter doesn’t melt on the bread 
afterwards. To be frank, I prefer my toast soggy, my butter melted, and my 
toast not to take the best part of half an hour to prepare. The quick and easy 
wholemeal loaf is delicious though, and it toasts very well. In a toaster.

• Stephen Bush is cooking his way through Delia’s Complete How To Cook  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/delia-s-complete-how-to-cook.html>(BBC Books, 
£40) in a year;@stephenkb <https://twitter.com/stephenkb>. You can watch Delia 
Smith’s free Online Cookery School videos atdeliaonline.com 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/>; @DeliaOnline <https://twitter.com/DeliaOnline>
