
Things must have been bad. At my office, stuck in front of the computer, I 
started to fantasise about an old-fashioned sanatorium, where a kindly nurse in 
a starched uniform wheels you out in your Bath chair to snooze in the sun all 
day. I'd had enough of hi-tech, constant demands, and yearned for peace.

The closest I could find to this ideal was the Viva Mayr clinic in Austria. It 
is very much a medical clinic rather than a luxury spa: the staff wear white, 
there is no Wi-Fi, and its detox programme is not for the faint-hearted.

A friend who had been before said to me: "You're mad. Really, I was very ill. 
I vomited for three days."

I was taken aback. I had read about the starvation diet, the colonic 
irrigation, the endless chewing. But it hadn't occurred to me that I might 
actually get sick. All the same, I was feeling bloated and strung out. And the 
flights were already booked.

On the drive from Ljubljana airport, I wolf down the emergency sandwich and 
KitKat I bought at Stansted, knowing this will be the last substantial food 
I'll get for a week.

The Viva Mayr Clinic is an attractive modern building beside beautiful Lake 
Worth. Guest rooms are immaculate and stylish, with huge picture windows. But 
you don't come here for the interiors. The Mayr diet was devised in the early 
20th century by Dr Franz Mayr, who was passionate about the link between 
digestion and health. His original Mayr & More clinic is nearby. But that is 
truly hardcore: I heard that inmates get little more than stale bread and milk 
from one day to the next. I've opted for Mayr-lite: the Viva Mayr was started 
in 2004 by Dr Harald Stossier, head physician at the original Mayr clinic for 
10 years, and his wife Christine, also a doctor. The idea was to provide the 
same "cure" but in a more palatable form: here the food, though meagre, will be 
delicious.

I've been instructed to prepare for my visit by quitting tea and coffee – the 
Mayr cure is tough enough without the additional burden of caffeine withdrawal. 
I've also been given four rules: chew as much as possible – Stossier recommends 
30-40 times each mouthful; eat nothing raw after 4pm – it's too much for the 
digestive system, which has already begun winding down; take at least 15 
minutes of exercise a day; and eat most early in the day, reducing portion 
sizes as the day goes on (breakfast like a king, lunch like a prince, dine like 
a pauper).

The dining room, when I enter, is whisper-quiet – all I can hear, in fact, is 
chewing. The waitress presents me with a menu. Because it's my first night, I'm 
allowed to choose two supplements to the stale bread that is considered the 
main event. I choose three modest slices of turkey breast and some avocado.

On my way up to bed, I'm instructed to take a mug of water loaded with Epsom 
salts. This I'm to drink the next morning on an empty stomach.

I've read enough about the place to know what will happen: forgive me, but 
explosive diarrhoea is a guaranteed feature for the first few days. This is why 
there are loos everywhere, and why normally polite people break off 
conversations abruptly and start to run. Fortunately, since you barely eat 
anything during your stay, the trouble is kept to a minimum – by the end of the 
week, there's simply nothing left inside you. Days start early – which is not 
really my thing. On top of that I have to get various timings right: rise at 
6am, drink Epsom salts with an alkaline powder, wait at least half an hour till 
breakfast, hoping that you have enough time for it before the Epsom salts get 
you rushing to the loo, and try to complete the gruesome morning evacuation 
before the first treatment starts, often at 7.30am. On top of this, I must 
drink three litres of water a day, but leave half an hour between drinking and 
eating because drinking with food ruins digestion, apparently.

In case there remains any doubt, the Viva Mayr is all about digestion.
 The Viva Mayr is more medical clinic than luxury spa Photograph: 
Prokop-Ernst-Peter 
On my first day, I am treated to a 30-minute private talk on chewing: you 
should chew until the food is liquid in your mouth, I'm told. I also have a 
vigorous stomach massage every day. This is often painful, as Stossier digs in 
to manipulate my intestines.

There is some spasticity in there, he says. And some blockages. But he 
decides, thank heavens, that I don't need colonic irrigation – something I 
truly dreaded. After a few days, the massage becomes less uncomfortable. I 
think it's doing me some good, but my stomach has started making peculiar 
gurgling noises.

My proper diet starts at lunch the following day. I'm pleasantly surprised by 
the delicious soup and vegetable dumpling, presented as if in the finest 
restaurant. But it's not very big and I know this is really the only food I'm 
going to get for the rest of the day. Supper is at 6pm and consists every night 
of stale spelt bread and vegetable broth (basically hot water tasting faintly 
of carrots). As the week progresses, I become desperate at the paucity and 
dullness of this fare.

It's amazing how long you can make it last. What with all the chewing, I 
manage nearly an hour. And after that? In the evening, the Viva Mayr is 
brain-numbingly boring. You are meant to rest, after all. I watch some bad 
German telly and read a trashy book (I've been advised not to take anything too 
complicated – you're far too faint to concentrate).

On the second day, things liven up with the arrival of a well-known fashion 
designer, who seems visibly upset about the tiny portions. He and his partner 
are soon joined by a chatty Kuwaiti in her early thirties who says she has been 
at the clinic for five weeks. The three have extensive and enthusiastic 
conversations about weight loss and body image, which gives me something to 
think about while I chew. ("Models," reveals the fashion designer by way of 
comfort, "simply don't eat." She tells me later about the liposuction she had 
on her thighs, and recommends I give it a go. "Everyone's doing it.") The Viva 
Mayr is a magnet for celebrities and the rich but there are plenty of 
"ordinary" people here too. Most of the Brits are down-to-earth middle-aged 
women enjoying a week of TLC.

But the Viva Mayr is expensive. It's not the room rates that push the cost up 
but the, often alarming, treatments – colonic irrigation, bloodletting, 
haematogenous oxidation therapy, nasal reflex therapy, intravenous infusions 
for various ailments. My advice is to question what you have been prescribed, 
and cut it by a third.

When I return (and yes, I will) I'll have fewer treatments (I'd definitely 
ditch the footbath that is supposed to remove toxins from the body). That said, 
much is brilliant here. The diet, the chewing, the massages and the emphasis on 
drinking water all contribute to my feeling much better by the end. Strangely, 
despite living on 600 calories a day, I rarely feel hungry – evidence, if it 
were needed, that I routinely eat too much. But the main benefit is rest. It is 
joyous being in a beautiful place where Wi-Fi is forbidden. I read books, lie 
by the lake in the sun, stare out of the window and allow myself to get bored. 
By day six, I'm in the groove and really don't want to go home.

The fashion designer loses kilos, I hear. But I lose little more than half a 
pound. Disaster? The doctors say Viva Mayr is about health, not weight loss. 
And on my return several people mention how well I look – brighter-eyed, and 
with clear skin.

Alas, keeping up the eating routine turns out to be almost impossible in the 
real world. Within three weeks I am back to my old habits: eating too much, too 
late, and not chewing enough. But I will return next year, and perhaps next 
time the cure will stick.

• The trip was provided by Viva Mayr (+43 42 73 31117, viva-mayr.com 
<http://www.viva-mayr.com>). Stays at the clinic costs cost from €175pp a 
night, including all meals, personal Viva Mayr diet, use of spa facilities, 
diet and chewing training and Kneipp water treatments. Other treatments are 
priced separately – massages from €37 for 25 minutes.EasyJet 
<http://www.easyjet.com> flies from Stansted to Ljubljana (from £58 return) and 
Ryanair <http://www.ryanair.com> flies Stansted to Klagenfurt (from £56 return)
