
You run England's academies and free schools under a system of one-man rule 
that Mussolini would have envied, so I was surprised that you have been so 
quiet over the last few weeks. A key part of your empire has been falling 
apart. Aren't you responsible for the chaos aroundthe resignation of the 
headteacher at Pimlico primary 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/09/free-school-head-no-teaching-qualifications-leaves-job>
, the financial irregularity atKing's science academy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/25/flagship-free-school-kings-science-academy>
, the disaster ofAl-Madinah  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/16/faith-school-dammed-by-ofsted-dysfunctional>
and your ministers juggling with the stats over free schools' supposed success?

Again, you seem to be lying doggo on a Sunday Times story  
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/Education/article1332693.ece>
that there are plans to get rid of "soft" GCSEs like law, media studies, art, 
drama and PE. Can I tell you how arrogant this way of launching policy looks to 
teachers, parents and students? I suspect that you and a tiny group of 
like-minded folk draw up a plan; you choose which newspaper you'll leak it to; 
an anonymous spokesperson – coming ideally from a sub-committee – briefs a 
journalist and a "policy" is launched. You'll remember you released your first 
ideas concerning GCSEs through the Daily Mail, though on that occasion you put 
yourself in the front line by doing the briefing in person. Then, when the 
wheels fell off, it looked as if you were in the driving seat. You've learned 
from that boob, so now, your GCSE revolution has been handed out through the 
tradesmen's entrance: Ofqual did it – looking for all the world as if you 
weren't indoors telling them to.

Does it occur to you that this process is totalitarian and that you behave as 
if the hundreds of thousands of teachers, parents, students and academics 
involved in education are your vassals? Parliament has betrayed us by ceding to 
your office the right to behave like this. The army of political scientists and 
journalists who fine-tune themselves in the art of analysing power seem 
indifferent to this coup d'état. Sad to say, your Labour predecessors were 
complicit in this. I detect a political immaturity here: when, at the heart of 
British government, unaccountable power is grabbed, provided this is done by 
people with the right accents and degrees from the right places, the 
politicians, journalists and academics who share this culture hardly blink.

So, a major change in the fabric of secondary education is enacted without a 
full marshalling and discussion of evidence from academics, without a full 
hearing of thoughts from interested parties – in this case professionals 
involved in arts, PE and media studies in education, without listening to the 
professional teachers' associations, unions or school governors – nor, of 
course, to the vestiges of advisers and officers in the now smashed local 
government education offices.

You are fond of citing the views of "the employers", along with horror stories 
about the significance of the international tables we're slipping down. How odd 
then that, on this occasion, you don't have any words for us on the views of 
employers in the arts, media and sport on this planned downgrading – nor indeed 
any kind of commentary on how "we" have supposedly sunk down any arts, PE or 
media league tables.

You haven't really been quiet. This newspaper told us on 18 October that you 
had slipped off to Boston 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/18/michael-gove-boston-visit-education>
, on a fact-finding mission. I've been in plenty of US classrooms myself, and 
many US schools face similar problems: people running education who have never 
taught, policies introduced without evidence to back them and, in the case of 
learning-to-read systems, a policy for which the US government's own stats (see
Reading First's trials 
<http://skrashen.blogspot.co.uk/2013/06/does-intensive-decoding-instruction.html>
) offered no evidence that it would improve reading for meaning, ie real 
reading. I noticed that your itinerary did not include a school I've been in 
twice, the Manhattan New School, an example of an experimental "free" school, 
but which remained within the public system, accountable to the New York 
district.

In the last paragraph of the article, the real reason for your visit became 
clear: your speech to the Foundation for Excellence in Education, one of the 
many trusts that emerge in the US which are apparently benevolent but, more 
often than not, turn out to be channels through which major corporations flog 
their products to the public sector. One of the foundation's senior members, 
Jeb Bush – he who smoothed Bro Dubya's path to the White House by massaging the 
voter registrations of African Americans – was at your side. To marketise 
education with, say, Rupert Murdoch's school curricula, you will need schools 
that can be set up by any old corporation – check; run without interference 
from locally elected bodies – check; without interference from anyone demanding 
that teachers be qualified – check; with a supine central government and press 
– check.

You're right. These last few weeks you haven't had to say a word.

Yours, Michael Rosen
