
My kitchen is … horrible! I live in a rented flat in Hackney, east London, and 
the kitchen is all faux 90s country cottage – it has these nasty Spanish 
terracotta tiles that drive me insane. It’s totally naff, but in really good 
condition, so I can’t do anything about it.

My favourite piece of kit is … my phone – I don’t wear a watch, and my oven 
clock doesn’t work, so I use it as a timer. I also create shopping lists on my 
iPhone notes, look up recipes online and I’m always listening to music on it 
while I’m cooking. I takeall my Instagram photos 
<http://instagram.com/symmetrybreakfast> with it too. And I’ve always loved 
ceramics and tableware – I have lots of platters and serving boards.

My storecupboard staple is … rice. My family is Chinese so I’m used to buying 
big 20kg bags of long-grain white rice from Chinese supermarkets. I also have 
all sorts of posh varieties. And then I always, always, always have lots of 
whole milk in my fridge, for coffee.

My go-to cookbook is … the Carnation Evaporated Milk cookbooks 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Carnation-Evaporated-Milk-Cookbook/dp/0831731907> 
I had as a kid. I got these when I was still at primary school and even after I 
left home, I would have to make my mum something from them whenever I went back 
home.

When I’m starving I … eat speculoos spread 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/food-and-drink/news/biscuit-spread-dubbed-crack-in-a-jar-is-flying-off-supermarket-shelves-9474458.html>
 out of a jar with a spoon, or more likely just my finger. If I have more time, 
it’s Nissin instant chicken noodles – I practically grew up on them (Chinese 
family and all that) or – more recently – cheese toasties made in a waffle 
machine.

Everything tastes better with … mayonnaise. This is where Mark, my boyfriend 
and I truly part ways. He is ketchup and I am mayo. I just can’t get enough of 
it. At the moment, I’m in love with theJapanese brand KewPie 
<http://www.thekitchn.com/what-is-kewpie-mayonnaise-44639>, which has a good 
baby logo too.

My best-kept kitchen secret is … to store lettuce in a glass of water, not in 
the fridge. I read this in an article about freegans and have been doing it 
ever since – the lettuce stays crisp for at least a week. My ultimate kitchen 
tip, though, is to read a recipe in full before you start. Honestly, the number 
of times I’ve been caught out and not had enough of something or used all the 
sugar in step two and not had enough at the end. Sit down, with a drink, read 
it through andthen begin.

I’m currently obsessed with … people’s restricted conception of what breakfast 
should be – this is for breakfast, but that definitely isn’t. It’s so silly. 
I’ve just been to China and Japan, and breakfast in Asia is generally so 
different. You can virtually have anything you like for breakfast.
