
It was the last day of a hot July camping trip. We were in the Oregon 
wilderness five hours from home and my girlfriend Marisa and I went rafting 
downriver. A friend offered to drive Leo, our border collie, to meet us at the 
end.

Leo was our baby. We got him from a pound as this crazy pup and, with 
training, he became obedient and loving. We played competition Frisbee and went 
on long runs; he’d be off the leash but always by my side.

When we got off the river, the friend who drove Leo was laughing, saying he’d 
leapt out of the car and taken off back up river. Her flippancy indicated she 
knew where he was. But she didn’t. We were in the middle of nowhere. Just a 
road, a river and cliffs. Marisa and I searched into the night. The next day I 
was horrified when I almost tripped over an animal carcass. I thought a cougar 
had got Leo. It was a dead deer. We returned home that night and cried like 
babies.

We made multiple trips back. Marisa posted flyers. We got lots of phone calls 
but couldn’t always act on them because it was a five-hour drive away. I 
couldn’t live not knowing what had happened, so I hired a man whose sniffer dog 
was known locally for finding the bodies of two missing girls. Nothing 
conclusive came from it. He’d been missing for a month when a lady said she’d 
found a border collie and described Leo. We drove down but it was a shorthaired 
female. We gave up hope.

That summer I became a bit destructive. I drank more than I should have. 
Little things upset me, like him not being there to lick my breakfast plate. By 
October, the phone calls stopped. That winter was brutal. He couldn’t have 
survived.

Then, in April, a woman started leaving messages. She sounded a little manic 
and called at odd hours saying she’d seen Leo in her yard. I told her to stop 
wasting our time, but she was so intense: “I am looking at your flyer and I’m 
telling you I see him every morning like clockwork.” She described a freckle on 
his nose. It was undoubtedly Leo.

We drove to her small town. It was only a gas station and some rural homes. We 
pulled into the station, opened the car door and there was Leo, just standing 
there. We took one step towards him and he got this mischievous look in his 
eyes and ran off. He was like a coyote. He didn’t recognise us – we were just 
people. That was the start of a hunt through the town.

We developed a map of his daily sightings. The gas station owner had started 
leaving him breakfast. Another lady said he came to her barn in the hills. We 
figured he slept there. We even saw him cross a four-lane highway; he sat at 
the side, waited for a car to pass, looked both ways, then crossed. We got 
close to him a couple of times, but he always ran. It was torture to see him 
and not be able to play. I resigned myself to the fact that he was happy and 
healthy, but now a wild dog.

After three days, we headed home, with Marisa crying. Then the lady who’d 
originally spotted him called and said to wait at her property in the morning. 
We couldn’t give up. I called a trapper company who brought a 10ft cougar trap. 
We baited it with meat and drove home, unsure of success. A day later, she 
called: Leo was in the cage. We sped back, worried he might have post-traumatic 
stress and try to tear our throats out.

Related: Experience: I grew up in a cemetery 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/30/experience-i-grew-up-in-a-cemetery>

When we got there, Leo stared at us with his ears up, coyote-style. But when 
we were close enough to smell, his ears dropped and he did this move where he’s 
madly in love and falls on his side and wiggles. We were crying and petting 
him. It was very emotional. He had fleshy tumours dangling off him; he was 
infested with ticks. I threw my Frisbee and he did a backflip without 
hesitation. He hadn’t forgotten a single trick.

He was so loving and happy to come home. He was heavier than before, rippling 
with muscle. That summer he was the ring bearer at our wedding.

We now have a son, and Leo never leaves his side. We still don’t fence Leo in 
because we know he won’t run away from us. Now he runs to look for us.

• As told to Candice Pires

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
