
A former staff member of the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) is suing the 
agency, claiming gross negligence and failure in duty of care after he was 
kidnapped and shot in Dadaab, Kenya.

Project manager Steve Dennis was travelling in a convoy through the camp when 
his car came under fire by kidnappers. A driver was killed, Steve was shot in 
the leg and he and three other colleagues were taken captive.


After four days of being marched towards the Somali border, they were rescued 
when a pro-government Somali group attacked their kidnappers and freed them.


Since the incident Dennis, a highly experienced field project manager with 
previous postings in Sri Lanka, Ivory Coast, Chad, South Sudan and Somalia, has 
suffered from physical problems resulting from his gunshot wound, and 
post-traumatic stress disorder, with symptoms including insomnia and acute 
hyper-vigilance. “I was a zombie for months afterwards,” he says.

After the incident, he began to look into what had happened and claims to have 
found that NRC’s security measures in place at the time were lax and 
ineffective. “I discovered there were extreme shortfalls in the investigation 
around the incident and evidence that was uncovered indicated significant 
errors were made.”


He also believes the support the organisation offered him was inadequate. In 
addition to what he claims was insufficient post incident debriefing and 
support, Dennis says he was provided with a financial settlement from NRC’s 
insurers that was not sufficient to cover his personal losses.

In the years since, Dennis has learned that the damage to his leg may be 
permanent. In addition, his PTSD is so severe that he now accepts he will never 
return to the field and that his career in frontline aid work is over.


Related: Foreign aid: which countries are the most generous? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/09/foreign-aid-which-countries-are-the-most-generous>

He has filed two claims against NRC, for support for physical and 
psychological damage covering personal financial losses, and gross negligence 
in duty of care. Having exhausted his own funds, he has now turnedto 
crowdfunding his legal costs <https://fundrazr.com/campaigns/712IC2>: so far, 
he has raised $27,000.


Dennis’s case may not be the first of its kind, but it is certainly one of the 
most high-profile cases to address an issue much talked about in the aid world. 
“I have seen too many cases where security management in insecure places was 
less than stellar,” comments one donor to his appeal. “I stopped working as an 
aid worker because I lost trust [in] the NGO I worked for to evacuate me in 
case I required it,” says another, who wished to remain anonymous. “I think 
what you are doing is important for aid workers and the people they provide 
service to.”


Brendan McDonald, of the #bewellservewell campaign that advocates for 
systematic changes in the way aid agencies care for staff, believes that there 
are plenty of other aid workers who have such concerns about their NGOs. “I 
know of many other aid workers who have suffered serious and lasting mental and 
physical problems as a result of their work, and who feel strongly that their 
agencies have not provided adequate care. This is a seriously under-recognised 
problem across the industry.”


One security expert who wished to remain anonymous, who has specific 
experience working with aid agencies in Kenya and Dadaab, agrees Dennis’ case 
raises a bigger issue . “The aid system is very far behind the curve when it 
comes to managing its staff in these situations, certainly compared to 
militaries,” he says. “I’ve seen numerous people with what certainly appear to 
be the symptoms of trauma leading up to PTSD still in the field, still 
operating and in senior positions.”


 Although he is one of only a handful of aid workers who have taken their 
agencies to court, Dennis believes this is due to a combination of fear, 
unwillingness to admit weakness and what such a step might do to a career, 
rather than because aid agencies have high standards of security and aftercare. 
“I get a huge reaction when I talk to colleagues,” he says. “There are so many 
people who have scary stories, bad stories, stories that they are still living 
in where they feel under supported and dangerous situations.”

Dennis says that financial settlement is not the main objective of his case. 
“I would like my personal losses covered. But primarily I want an independent 
review of the incident and a public statement if there is negligence found.”

“I’ve spent three years of my life on this and it’s been such a challenge to 
relationships, to my family, to my own sanity. I used to run massive projects. 
I ran a hospital with over 200 staff. Now I have a hard time getting through a 
traffic jam without having to do breathing exercises for 45 minutes. The 
currency I’m dealing with is emotional energy and time. And I can understand 
deeply why other people don’t take out these actions.”

Dennis says that he hopes that the case will make aid agencies think more 
carefully about whether they have consistently applied duty of care and whether 
they have done everything reasonable to prevent an incident like his.


Related: How to communicate the sustainable development goals to the public 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/07/how-to-communicate-the-sustainable-development-goals-to-the-public>

“Like everyone going into a risky situation for work, I believe there’s a 
minimum level of training and procedures required and when it’s not there I 
believe there should be accountability for it.”

“NRC deeply regrets the traumatic experience suffered by Steve Dennis and 
other colleagues in June 2012,” the organisation told the Guardian. “Safety for 
our staff is a high priority and we constantly strive to ensure a safe working 
environment for all our staff, strengthen our risk management culture and 
security systems, and to learn from incidents.


“We have been in dialogue with Steve Dennis and NRC regrets that we have not 
been able to reach an agreement so far. We will continue our efforts to find a 
solution. The case involves important issues that will be fully examined 
through the proceedings. The court case, which will take place in Oslo, has 
been scheduled for late October. Beyond this we cannot comment on the case.”


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
