
It’s February. New year’s resolutions have lapsed (well, mine have), it’s cold 
and there’s the saccharine/loneliness – delete as applicable – of Valentine’s 
Day lurking just down the line.
So, what’s February for, aside from separating January and March? For me, it’s 
the excuse I need to surprise my brain out of its habitual approaches to work 
and life. It’s time to explore different ideas. To vary my perspective.

This means making time to shift my attention, change focus and challenge my 
thinking. Like Paula did. She teaches children on the autistic spectrum and has 
started learning to play the ukulele. It requires different skills, and takes 
her mind completely off the day job. “I can’t think about lesson plans while 
learning to play ‘Let it Be’,” she says.


Enhance your mood, detach, see the world differently

Her music lessons offer “ninety minutes of refreshment”. There’s no direct 
link with her job, but they enhance her mood, help her detach from the everyday 
and encourage her to think differently.
A few years ago, one colleague, a freelance writer and academic, was in a rut. 
On a whim, she enrolled onto a part-time City and Guilds course in sound 
engineering. It rejuvenated her approach to work and – significantly for a 
writer – gave her access to a new language, and a new, sonic and spatial way of 
perceiving the world.
I like art exhibitions. There’s the journey, walking through the gallery to 
get to the exhibition and tuning myself in to its environment. I have to focus, 
try to understand the reality presented, think about how I interpret the images 
I see.

This combination of reflection and deliberately assuming distinct and 
different perspectives is effective, enabling me to make space for myself, away 
from my colleagues’ opinions on the latest communications strategy or approach 
to incentives. I am physically, emotionally and psychologically away from work. 
I have completely different words and images in front of me. It works because I 
value the experience for itself.
Just before Christmas I volunteered for the Secret Pillow Project at their 
pop-up
shop in London’s Old Street station. My job was to attract the attention of 
commuters, show them how to fold a Secret Pillow and encourage them to talk to 
us about this women’s empowerment project in India.

I was astounded by the speed at which people rushed past, avoiding eye 
contact, looking miserable and unsmiling. Again, my volunteering had no direct 
relevance to my work. But it prompted me to reflect on how we can all improve 
the first impressions we make.

Overall, challenging yourself to do something completely different can help 
you:

 * Create space so you can prioritise 
 * Boost your lateral thinking 
 * Make a better first impression: the openness and enthusiasm generated by 
plunging yourself into something will seep into other areas of your life. 
How do you decide which “something different” to do?

Paula chose the ukulele because she went to a concert in a local pub, saw how 
much people were enjoying themselves and was told it isn’t difficult to learn. 
My colleague studied sound engineering, partly because she’s fascinated by 
music and sound, and partly because, serendipitously, a college brochure popped 
through her letterbox.

I go to art exhibitions because every visit introduces me to images I have 
never seen before, some beautiful, some I have to turn away from. I engage on 
an emotional level and after an hour or so my world has an additional filter. I 
volunteer for The Secret Pillow Project because I support the project’s aims. I 
love the approach: encouraging independence and entrepreneurship in women who 
never thought they could achieve either.

Over to you

So, what fascinates you? What have you always wanted to try? What would be 
something completely different for you?

If nothing comes to mind try: 

 * A Google search for “February challenges” (NB: other months are available) 
 * Check out these volunteering opportunities <https://do-it.org/ for 
volunteering opportunities> 
 * Learn an instrument <http://www.musicteachers.co.uk/> (there are also 
videos on YouTube if you want to learn independently) 
 * Or there’s always weightlifting <http://britishweightlifting.org> if you 
fancy building some muscles… 
Good luck, and let us know how you get on.
