
On good days, we are able to talk about what is going on with the kids, 
discuss world affairs, and sometimes (although increasingly rarely) have a 
laugh. More and more, we are ships that pass in the night, a simmering 
resentment ever present, which we struggle to conceal for the sake of the kids. 
It is truly painful for me and I can only imagine that it must be for you too, 
although we don’t discuss it. On the few occasions when my frustration has 
boiled over and I have mentioned divorce, you seem shocked that I could be 
selfish enough to entertain such an idea.

We have been together for 20 years, starting out as equals with our own 
careers, until you decided to do your own thing. For several years, I supported 
you in your endeavours, practically, financially and emotionally, contrary to 
the advice of most of those around us and despite near bankruptcy. Against the 
odds, it worked out better than we could have imagined and your financial and 
professional success has been meteoric.

This change in fortune coincided with our move to the country where we now 
live, the birth of our first child and my no longer working. That was when the 
cracks began to appear.

I do what I can to ensure our kids have a normal childhood, while all the 
while I'm dying inside

During a complicated and life-threatening pregnancy, several miscarriages and 
the difficulties of adapting to a new country with small children in tow, I 
felt largely unsupported and literally and metaphorically alone. Your work has 
always come first. In times of distress, I have been left feeling unloved and 
unworthy.

I know from our rows about this that you believe that I am not a supportive 
wife. When I have tried to discuss these feelings with you, we invariably end 
up trying to outdo one another with the “You’re more selfish than me” line, and 
end in stalemate.

Since I stopped having sex with you two years ago, your resentment and 
dismissiveness towards me have reached new levels. Even our youngest child 
comments that you ignore me when you get up in the morning. Their awareness is 
even more difficult to deal with than the dismissiveness itself.

I have let my health and appearance go, much to your obvious annoyance. 
I drink more than I should, eat more than I should and have become glum and 
reclusive. The only thing that keeps me going is trying to do the best for our 
kids. I do what I can to try to ensure they have a “normal” childhood, while 
all the while I’m dying inside. I feel that I have no other option than to stay 
with you.

We were born and raised in different countries and are now living in a third 
country that our children call home. So where do I go if I leave you? 
Ironically, and in spite of your success, we could not afford two homes here, 
as we live in one of the world’s most expensive cities.

I feel, rightly or wrongly, that this is best for the kids and so do you, it 
would seem. We don’t have blazing rows, neither of us is violent and we 
co-parent well enough. So, it doesn’t feel as if I have a good enough reason to 
tear their lives apart other than my own inner torment and, I admit, your 
complete frustration with me.

What compelled me to write this letter was a cold. Yes, a pathetic cold. I 
have been sneezing and coughing all weekend, while trying to ensure that the 
kids are fed and watered and the household runs smoothly. Not once have you 
asked if I’m OK or offered to do the kids’ bedtime routine, or even suggested I 
might have a Sunday lie-in instead of you, God forbid.

It is a small thing but it sums up our marriage. Depressingly, most of my 
former flatmates would probably have been more attentive than you, my husband. 
As I write, I am peevishly hoping you catch my cold so that I can reciprocate 
in kind, for tragically, that is what things have come to in this seemingly 
endless marriage of ours.

Anonymous

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Email family@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:family@guardian.co.uk> or write to Family Life, The Guardian, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include your address and phone number
