
The Master said: “Do not be concerned that you have no position, be concerned 
that you have what it takes to merit a position. Do not be concerned that no 
one recognises you, seek that which is worthy of recognition.” For all his 
considerable merits, Confucius, whose words these are, would have made a rotten 
academic mentor at today’s university.

Nowadays, it is all about show. If you are applying for a research grant, for 
instance, you need an imaginative “public engagement” plan. You will swear to 
saturate social media with updates and novelties. At the same time you won’t 
forget the more old-fashioned folk, with colourful exhibitions at the local 
library, and maybe something on the radio.

With his ‘Why I am so wise’ and ‘Why I am so clever’ chapters, Nietzsche was 
clearly ahead of his time

Could this be a little worrying? After all, at the time when you are applying 
for the grant, you haven’t yet done the work. Maybe your research will be a 
disappointment and you can’t show what you hoped. What do you do? An exhibition 
in the style ofMagritte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/23/rene-magritte-like-standup-comedian-charlie-skelton>
: “This is not a research result”? A Beckett-inspired radio play “Waiting 
for thermonuclear fusion?” Of course not. If you can’t promise a positive 
result, you don’t even get the grant.

Friedrich Nietzsche perhaps had the right idea. His autobiographical Ecce Homo 
begins with the chapters: Why I am so wise, Why I am so clever, and Why I write 
such good books. Admittedly his academic career was long over by then, 
curtailed by illness, and this was his last significant publication before his 
catastrophic descent into mental illness. Nevertheless, in this, as in so many 
matters, Nietzsche was clearly ahead of his time.

The philosopher Bernard Williams 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jun/13/guardianobituaries.obituaries>, in 
his paper Politics and Moral Character, argued that the characteristics that 
allow politicians to rise to the top might not be the virtues we seek in those 
who govern us: “Lying, or at least concealment and the making of misleading 
statements; breaking promises; special pleading; temporary coalition with the 
distasteful; sacrifice of the interests of worthy persons to those of unworthy 
persons; and (at least if in a sufficiently important position) coercion up to 
blackmail”.

Now, I would not want to try too close a comparison with academia, but there 
is something to be said for the reverse argument. That is, those who exhibit 
highly admirable academic characteristics such as caution, refusal to 
exaggerate, humility, deference to the achievement of others, and support of 
their colleagues will have a much harder time rising to the top. But then, not 
wishing to rise to the top is another admirable trait, so perhaps it all works 
out after all.

Related: As history shows, prizes don’t always end up in the right place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/sep/15/research-excellence-framework-universities-funding>

How have we got into this academic bragging contest? I suspect in part it is 
the unintended consequence of a series of well-intentioned attempts to defend 
universities against government cuts. Committees of vice-chancellors have 
lobbied successive governments with claims about the critical contribution 
higher education makes to the economy, to science and innovation, to culture, 
and to the creative industries.

But ministers and civil servants have been well trained on their own degree 
courses not to trust anything without evidence. And they have learned from 
Williams and others that it is corrupt to divert public money to your former 
teachers, at least until you have the paperwork. What is the evidence that 
universities actually make a difference? What, exactly, are these life-changing 
or life-affirming contributions? So the call is cascaded to individual 
academics: prove you are worth it. After all, we are spending from the public 
purse and therefore must be held to account.

In the end, it is hard to argue that this is entirely the wrong approach. No 
one undertakes research without hoping it will make a contribution. The 
university sector needs to be proud of its collective achievements, and if we 
don’t publicise how can we even know what they are?

It would, though, be nice to cut out some of the boastfulness, without falling 
into what Aristotle regarded as the opposite vice of mock modesty. And so what 
is the golden mean between these two vices? Fittingly, perhaps, Aristotle 
pointed out that it lacks a name. But we know it when we see it: owning what 
one has achieved, neither more nor less.
