
Mark on Adam

What were you hoping for?
Just that it would go better than most of my other dates.

First impressions?
We arrived at exactly the same time, so that broke the ice.

What did you talk about?
Our jobs, our families, films, and what it’s like being a gay man living in 
London.

Any awkward moments?
When he told me he’d never seen Star Wars. Unforgivable.

Good table manners?
Well, he wasn’t banging his knife and fork on the table demanding food or 
screaming at the waiter. So that was good.

Best thing about Adam?
He was really easy to talk to.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
Of course, though they’d probably eat him alive.

Describe him in three words?
Chirpy, friendly and sweet.

What do you think he made of you?
He probably thought, “He’s just finished that second bottle of prosecco.”

Did you go on somewhere?
To a pub round the corner for a couple of pints.

And… did you kiss?
No. We exchanged numbers though.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I’ve just been to the shop to get ibuprofen, so probably the dirty hangover.

Marks out of 10?
The date itself? I’d say 8.

Would you meet again?
Our paths may cross, but I can’t see romance a’bloomin’.

Adam on Mark

What were you hoping for? 
Good conversation with someone who hadn’t slept with any of my friends.

First impressions?
He was outgoing, which made conversation pretty easy.

What did you talk about?
Taylor Swift, holidays, and we compared notes on tattoos.

Any awkward moments?
I could have gone for less info on his other recent dates.

Good table manners?
I appreciated him keeping my glass topped up.

Best thing about Mark?
His pop-culture references.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
I don’t know. My friends can be a bit much.

Describe him in three words?
Likes a drink.

What do you think he made of you?
Hopefully, I made him laugh.

Did you go on somewhere?
A pint at the bar next door.

And… did you kiss?
In an “it was nice to meet you” way. My mother doesn’t need to go hat shopping 
yet.

Related: Blind date: ‘I had food envy’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/26/blind-date-aimee-gavin> 

If you could change one thing, what would it be?
I never got a proper look at the dessert menu.

Marks out of 10?
6 for an entertaining evening but the sparks didn’t fly.

Would you meet again?
Probably not.

• Mark and Adam ate at Opso <http://opso.co.uk>, London W1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial, go to 
soulmates.theguardian.com <http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
