
Despite five years of growing criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/23/qatar-nepal-workers-world-cup-2022-death-toll-doha>
, Fifa and the Qatari authorities have been accused of ongoing indifference 
towards systemic abuse and “appalling treatment” of migrant workers working on 
stadiums that will host the 2022 World Cup.

A damning new report by Amnesty International, which interviewed 132 
contractors working on refurbishing the Khalifa International Stadium in Doha 
and a further 102 landscapers who work in the Aspire Zone sports complex that 
surrounds it, claimed that they all reported human rights abuses of one kind or 
another.

Related: UN gives Qatar a year to end forced labour of migrant workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/un-gives-qatar-year-end-forced-labour-migrant-workers>

The findings will prove controversial because Qatar’s Supreme Committee for 
Delivery and Legacy has made ensuring minimum standards are met on World Cup 
stadium projects a priority in the wake of widespread criticism of the broader 
conditions in which migrant labourers, who make upmore than 90% of Qatar’s 2.1m 
population 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2014/01/21/qatar-serious-migrant-worker-abuses>, live 
and work.

For the first time, Amnesty said it had definitively identified mistreatment 
and abuses on aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> stadium site rather 
than on infrastructure projects that underpin Qatar’s ambitious 2030 Vision, of 
which the football tournament has become an integral part.

It said that workers refurbishing the Khalifa stadium, scheduled to host one 
of the World Cup semi-finals in 2022, reported they were forced to live in 
squalid accommodation, appeared to pay huge recruitment fees, and have had 
wages withheld and passports confiscated. Amnesty conducted the interviews 
during three visits over the course of a year from February 2015.

Qatari law prohibits retention of passports, delayed payment of wages or 
deceptive recruitment (where workers are promised a certain wage in their 
country of origin only to be paid less when they arrive). But Amnesty found 
evidence that all of those practices remained widespread during the period in 
question.

The number of labourers working directly on World Cup stadiums increased from 
2,000 to 4,000 in the past year and is expected to grow to 36,000 in the next 
two years.

The Amnesty report alleges that while the organising committee has introduced 
welfare standards there are “significant gaps in application” and its efforts 
have been undermined by indifference from Fifa and apathy from the Qatari 
authorities.

The stadium is part of the lavish Aspire Zone sports complex where Bayern 
Munich, Everton and Paris Saint-Germain trained this winter. The Welsh rugby 
team trained there before last year’s World Cup.

Of the men interviewed, Amnesty’s report found that the vast majority alleged 
they had their passports confiscated, 88 had been denied the right to leaveQatar
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>, many reported their wages being 
paid three or four months in arrears and there was evidence that some workers 
on the stadium contracted to a labour-supply company “appear to have been 
subjected to forced labour”.

It said that there was evidence of workers being threatened with non-payment 
of wages, being deported or – conversely – not being allowed to leave Qatar 
because their employer would not provide an exit permit.

It claimed all the men interviewed had taken out loans to pay for 
recruitment-related fees, often to agencies in their home country. The practice 
is forbidden by Qatari law but remains widespread.

One metalworker on the stadium told Amnesty in April 2015: “My life here is 
like a prison. The work is difficult, we worked for many hours in the hot sun. 
When I first complained about my situation, soon after arriving in Qatar, the 
manager said, ‘If you want to complain you can, but there will be consequences. 
If you want to stay in Qatar, be quiet and keep working.’ Now I am forced to 
stay in Qatar and continue working.”

Amnesty concluded that the human rights abuses it documented were the result 
of “multiple failures” and that while there had been a belated focus on the 
quality of workers’ accommodation by some of the companies involved, they have 
done little to address other well-documented issues such as deception in the 
recruitment process.

“The abuse of migrant workers is a stain on the conscience of world football. 
For players and fans, a World Cup stadium is a place of dreams. For some of the 
workers who spoke to us, it can feel like a living nightmare,” said Amnesty 
International’s director general, Salil Shetty.

“Indebted, living in squalid camps in the desert, paid a pittance, the lot of 
migrant workers contrasts sharply to that of the top-flight footballers who 
will play in the stadium. All workers want are their rights: to be paid on 
time, leave the country if need be and be treated with dignity and respect.”

The report is particularly critical of Fifa’s failure to exert pressure on the 
Qatari authorities and a “lack of meaningful action to address the issue”.

The crisis-hit world football governing body has only now promised to 
“formalise its human rights due diligence process”, vowed to change its World 
Cup bidding rules and has commissioned Harvard’s Professor John Ruggie to write 
a report on its human rights standards.

The Amnesty report concludes its “actions and omissions offer little hope that 
Fifa plans to do all it can to ensure that the 2022 World Cup will leave a 
positive legacy and not a trail of human misery”.

Shetty said: “Despite five years of promises, Fifa has failed almost 
completely to stop the World Cup being built on human rights abuses.”

In the wake of a series of damning reports by NGOs, including Amnesty and 
Human Rights Watch, and major investigations by media outlets including the 
Guardian, the Qatari government commissioned law firm DLA Piper to review the 
issue in 2013.

It promised to overhaul the kafala system 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/apr/25/un-qatar-abolish-kafala-migrant-worker-system>
 that ties workers to their employers, reform the exit permit regime and 
introduce new laws that required payment to workers to be made electronically.

DLA Piper reported in May 2014 but almost two years on, the government has 
failed to enact its recommendations in full and has failed to properly audit 
how many migrant labourers are killed or injured at work.

In May last year, Amnesty accused the Qatari government of “promising little, 
delivering less” and has said the promised reforms to the kafala system do not 
go far enough.

In its new report, it concludes: “The government’s response raises serious 
questions about Qatar’s willingness to protect the hundreds of thousands of 
migrant workers living in the country. If abuse on a flagship World Cup project 
does not merit investigation and action, it is unlikely abuses that do not 
attract the international spotlight will be dealt with in an effective manner.”

The main contractor on the Khalifa stadium is a joint venture between Six 
Construct, a subsidiary of Belgian company Besix, and Midmac, a Qatari 
construction company. Other companies are contracted to carry out specific 
tasks, including Malaysian company Eversendai.

In turn, it used at least two “labour supply companies”. They are effectively 
agencies that sponsor a number of migrant workers to come to Qatar and hire 
them out to other companies.

As the report points out, the worst examples of abuse are often found buried 
beneath layers of sub-contractors. The landscaping work on the Aspire Zone is 
being done by Nakheel Landscapes, a Qatari company. The work on the Aspire Zone 
is not an official World Cup project.

In its response to Amnesty, Fifa pointed out the achievements of the supreme 
committee in introducing minimum welfare standards, the commitment by the new 
Fifa president, Gianni Infantino, to integrate labour rights specifically into 
the bidding process for the 2026 World Cup and the formation of a 2022 Fifa 
World Cup sustainability working group.

“While Fifa cannot and indeed does not have the responsibility to solve all 
the societal problems in a host country of a Fifa World Cup, Fifa has taken 
concrete action and is fully committed to do its utmost to ensure that human 
rights are respected on all Fifa World Cup sites and operations and services 
directly related to the Fifa World Cup,” said Fifa’s head of sustainability, 
Federico Addiechi.

A Fifa spokesman added that dialogue over improvements to workers welfare was 
a “ongoing process”.

“Challenges remain, but Fifa is confident that the structures and processes 
set up so far by the supreme committee for Delivery and Legacy, which is the 
entity responsible for the delivery of Fifa World Cup infrastructure, provide a 
good basis to monitor labour rights of migrant workers on Fifa World Cup 
stadium construction sites,” he said.

“These processes include the workers’ welfare standards in place since 2014, a 
compliance check for all tenderers, regular reporting that is publicly 
available and a four-tier system of auditing. This approach and these measures 
have been discussed with the key stakeholders, including Amnesty International.”

The spokesman added: “Furthermore, Fifa will continue to urge the competent 
governmental authorities in Qatar and other stakeholders to also take action 
and ensure that such standards become the benchmark for construction projects 
in Qatar.”

In a response to Amnesty, Midmac said: “We admire the work Amnesty 
International does and are fully committed to ensuring our entire workforce is 
treated with the dignity and respect they deserve.”

It said that where a sub-contractor was not willing to correct deficiencies it 
would immediately stop any collaboration with them. It said “terminating a 
sub-contract agreement is the strongest message we can send to those who are 
found to be non-compliant”.

Six Construct said it had terminated the contracts of some sub-contractors as 
a result of Amnesty’s investigation, while Eversendai said it had stopped 
dealing with the two labour supply companies, had no intention of working with 
them in future, and would engage direct labour “wherever possible”. It said it 
was now in full compliance with welfare standards.

Nakheel said it was committed to making improvements to its employee 
conditions but in the absence of Amnesty sharing relevant information “we 
wholly deny abuse of any of our workers on the Aspire maintenance project”.

The Aspire Zone Foundation said it would be working “hand in hand” with the 
supreme committee to launch a number of positive initiatives across all World 
Cup related projects.

Qatar’s 2022 supreme committee said it had called for an “immediate and 
comprehensive review of the application and enforcement” of its workers’ 
welfare standards among all contractors, sub-contractors and labour supply 
companies.

In a statement it said that it is “committed to ensuring the health, safety 
and well-being of every worker on World Cup projects”, that “the tone of 
Amnesty International’s latest assertions paint[s] a misleading picture” and 
“the conditions reported were not representative of the entire work force on 
Khalifa”.

The supreme committee argued that Amnesty focused on just four of the 40 
companies that work on the stadium and that many of the problems identified by 
the NGO had already been rectified by the time it approached it with the 
findings some months later.

Last week, Qatar was given 12 months to end migrant worker slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/un-gives-qatar-year-end-forced-labour-migrant-workers>
 or face a possible United Nations investigation that could see it become the 
fifth country to face a formal inquiry by the International Labour Organisation.

The move followed an ILO delegation to the Gulf state this month that also 
found migrant workers stranded for months without pay and stripped of their 
passports.
