
Ophelia Bobori probably has her daughter to thank for becoming a board member 
forLewisham Homes <https://www.lewishamhomes.org.uk/>. The social housing 
provider, which manages 18,000 homes on behalf of Lewisham council in 
south-east London, had invited Bobori to apply for the position – and her 
immediate reaction was that she could never do it. But her daughter, then 12, 
drew a small box and told Bobori that she was stuck inside the box and needed 
to venture outside. So she interviewed for the position and was successful.

“It has been absolutely amazing,” she says of the role, to which she was 
appointed in September 2013. “I can’t believe how I’ve flowered since I started 
on the board. I can’t believe how the board has developed me, my personality – 
qualities I didn’t know I had.”

Everything in life is an experience. You may find a person inside of you that 
you never knew, as I did
Ophelia Bobori 
Bobori, a mother of two, says her working background, first in the legal 
profession and now in the health industry as a pharmaceutical technician, means 
that she brings a capacity for probity to the board. “I’m a very practical 
person. If you bring me some evidence, I will scrutinise it and challenge it if 
necessary,” she says. This skill, combined with being a Lewisham Homes resident 
herself, means Bobori can help ensure that the board sees a true reflection of 
what goes on at the grassroots.

She is also something of an ambassador for Lewisham Homes, representing the 
organisation at parliament, where she makes the case for affordable housing, as 
well as speaking at events about women in the workplace. Public speaking is 
among the skills she has discovered while being a board member: “They have 
brought me out of myself,” she says, of the board. “They just saw something in 
me that I didn’t see in myself.”

 The main challenge of being a board member is finding the time, but Bobori 
says it is possible. “You can squeeze it in somehow,” she says. Flexibility, 
planning and prioritising are the key skills that help her avoid feeling 
stressed or overwhelmed. “A little bit of discipline is involved as well, 
because we all get lazy, and think: ‘Oh, I’ll do it tomorrow’. But that 
procrastination is the proverbial thief of time.”

Getting to grips with housing finance has also proved a challenge, but the 
board has provided training and that has beenvital, according to Bobori. “They 
really make every effort,” she says. “You are trained in how to be effective at 
board level, they don’t just leave you to it.”

Related: As a social housing tenant, I have always been treated with dignity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/dec/14/social-housing-tenant-dignity-housing-association>

A regular at community events in Lewisham, Bobori says it is important for 
others to see someone from a diverse background at board level “because they 
see that this can be done, that it’s not an impossibility”. She adds that she 
has sometimes been shocked at the lack of diversity that exists on other 
housing boards, some of which don’t even have residents sitting on them.

Describing herself as previously shy and retiring, she is amazed at how much 
more confident she feels now. “Everything in life is an experience,” she says. 
“If it’s not for you, then you can move on. But you may find a person inside of 
you that you never knew, as I did. It changed me for the better. ”

• The headline on this article was amended on 15 June 2016. An earlier version 
incorrectly described Lewisham Homes as a housing association.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.

If you represent a housing association looking for talented board members, do 
try the Guardian Jobsdiscounted board members package 
<http://recruiters.theguardian.com/blog/nhf-packages> and receive 60% off your 
job advertising.
