
This time last year, weight-loss brand Protein World asked women in London: 
Are You Beach Body Ready? The target audience reacted with anger – taking to 
social media to vent their frustrations and even vandalising the offending 
posters. The company massively misjudged the mood at the time, which was 
turning towards celebrating body-positivity.


Their unapologetic responses to the criticism – telling commenters to “grow 
up” and worse – led many to suspect it was all a publicity stunt. Most brands 
however, are not interested in courting controversy.

Watching such high profile social media crises unfold on the internet can be 
frightening for those who run their own business’ public profiles. The stakes 
are high but social media pitfalls shouldn’t mean you avoid it altogether – 
it’s a valuable (free) resource for boosting exposure and connecting with 
customers. Follow these five tips to avoid online catastrophe:

Set clear guidelines

Before you embark on any social media activity, make sure you are clear why 
you are there, what you want to talk about, and how. This will help you, and 
anyone else who manages your social media profile stay on topic. Make sure all 
of your content and comments adhere to these guidelines and are in a tone of 
voice appropriate for your brand.

It also helps to set a few ground rules for social media posts and responses, 
such as be honest, be polite, don’t badmouth competitors, be sure to add value 
to conversations. It’s worth taking inspiration from the social media 
guidelines of big brands if you’re stuck – a simple Google search will help.

Think beyond your own channels

It’s important that all of your employees act in a respectful manner on social 
media, even if they’re not speaking on behalf of the brand. This includes not 
‘badmouthing’ the business, revealing company secrets, partaking in online 
bullying or aggressive behaviour. Staff should also operate with transparency 
and identify themselves as an employee when talking about your company and 
services. Posting positive reviews without disclosure, for example, can call 
the integrity of your entire business into question.

Create and distribute a social media policy document so that everyone is aware 
of these requirements. You might also want to consider adding a clause to 
employment contracts.

Avoid sensitive topics 

It can be tempting to jump onto the stories that are trending online, but be 
careful here – many of these topics can be minefields for businesses. If it’s 
generated passionate debate, you run the risk of upsetting one side (or both) 
by taking part. Before you post, ask yourself: is this something I would bring 
up with a stranger while representing my business? If it’s not, then it’s best 
to leave well alone.

The same goes for hashtags – if you see one trending on Twitter know what it 
means before you enter the conversation. Some hashtags can seem innocuous 
enough but may be hiding a more sinister agenda, or may have been hijacked by 
groups you wouldn’t want associated with your brand.

Be prepared

Even with the best laid plans, sometimes a social media mishap is unavoidable. 
It’s important to be prepared. Are there regular misunderstandings about the 
services you provide? Could there be confusion over price? May someone have an 
issue with the customer care they were provided? Anticipate these occurrences 
and create appropriate responses for the team. This will mean you can reply in 
a thoughtful and timely manner. Speed is of the essence on social media.

Turn a negative into a positive 

If your company has attracted some unanticipated negative attention, there are 
four rules to follow: be human, be professional, be honest, and be timely.

Don’t be robotic or defensive in your response – try and see from the 
complainant’s point of view. Don’t bite back – no matter how rude they may be. 
Be truthful – even if that means admitting fault. And be quick – taking a long 
time to craft the perfect response can leave people to feel ignored.

Every negative comment is an opportunity to turn the situation around by being 
understanding and empathetic. Even if you’re dealing with someone who is being 
deliberately antagonistic, it’s an opportunity to show your professionalism and 
state the facts for the other people who may be observing from afar.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
