
Last term, I emailed a school and asked if they would like me to visit and 
talk to their pupils about applying to university. They emailed me back and 
said, “No, all of our pupils want to do dentistry at their local university 
this year and they’re not interested in hearing about your university.”

I am struggling to believe this is the whole truth.

When I was a student one of the most rewarding things I did with my time was 
access work. I went to schools on visits organised by other staff and I ran 
tours of the university at open days. However, now that I’m attempting to 
organise my own events I’ve discovered a new problem: getting through the door 
of the school in the first place. It’s not uncommon to email a head of sixth 
form, or gifted and talented coordinator, and simply be ignored. Sometimes I 
could be forgiven for thinking that the word university, or specifically my 
elite Russell Group university, puts schools off from the very first email.

When schools’ doors are opened to access talks, sometimes I meet with minds 
that are already closed, inadvertently, to applying to certain universities. 
I’ve seen teachers pull up maps of the country when introducing me and say, 
“Pupils from our school go to these universities…” while pointing to the 
powerhouses of the north, like Manchester, Liverpool and Sheffield. It’s great 
that applicants are thinking about those universities – but what about those 
who want to look elsewhere, to London, Wales or Scotland? Has the school 
already ruled those universities out in the minds of their pupils before 
they’ve even opened a prospectus?

Schools can also unwittingly set up barriers by dictating which pupils can 
attend access events or open days, for example by setting very high GCSE 
attainment cutoffs. This means the applicants that universities may be most 
interested in recruiting, who have perhaps hit a bump during their GCSEs, are 
already hearing the message from their school that certain universities are not 
for them.

I know the difference that such work can make to the aspirations of teenagers. 
Long after a visit, I’ve had students contact me, having got into a university 
they might not have considered, and say what a difference outreach made to 
them. They tell me that having students and graduates come to chat to them 
about what university is really like makes going to university seem much more 
achievable. Teenagers can see that these are people like them, from the same 
type of school, or background, or with the same accent, who have got to where 
they want to be. It no longer seems unrealistic to want to study medicine at 
Cardiff or archaeology at Durham or astrophysics at Cambridge.

So what can universities do if schools won’t let them in – particularly if a 
school has already decided that a university “isn’t for us”?

Fortunately, there are always switched-on and confident teenagers who do their 
own research, battle with their schools and apply to the places they’ve really 
set their hearts on. Many access officers put in long hours on forums such as 
The Student Room, or Facebook groups, trying to demystify the admissions 
process. For the rest, open days where current students can talk to applicants 
and dispel myths are incredibly useful for everyone involved.

“Is everyone posh/rich?” is a question I hear asked hundreds of times on open 
days. “Is anyone from a ‘normal’ [comprehensive/non-selective] school?” These 
are worries that should and can be fixed by face-to-face interaction with the 
university itself – its students, its admissions staff. Using social media or 
open days to bypass those schools who can’t or won’t engage with university 
access initiatives may be the best solution to widening and diversifying 
university intakes.

Nevertheless, that job would be a lot easier if universities could go into 
schools and talk to those pupils who are a bit less confident or not so aware 
of their options. They might just be the kind of student that universities most 
want to recruit.

This week’s anonymous academic is a lecturer at a Russell Group university.

If you’d like to contribute an anonymous piece about the trials and 
tribulations of university life, contact claire.shaw@theguardian.com.

More like this:
• Universities woo poorer students with mentoring not cash 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/24/universities-woo-poorer-students-with-mentoring-not-cash>
• Has the expansion of higher education helped to widen access? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/jul/14/widening-access-australia-uk-higher-education-live-chat>
• Social mobility in higher education: who does it better, Australia or the UK?
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/16/social-mobilty-higher-education-australia-uk-access-universities>

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. 
