
Back in January, I wrote my first piece for this blog 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/teacher-network/2012/jan/17/gove-underperforming-teachers-sack?INTCMP=SRCH>
. Within it I argued that, to a certain degree, Michael Gove was correct in his 
attempts to make it easier to remove under-performing teachers. At the end of 
August I even went on national television to argue that very same point. 
Therefore, it might not surprise you that, I don't wholly disagree with Michael 
Wilshaw's point regarding teachers leaving at 3pm. However, I will argue to my 
last breath that his latest statement has done nothing but give people more 
metal and grindstone for which to grind their axes.

For anyone to debate Gove and Wilshaw and remain credible they need to first 
admit that there is a hardcore group of teachers that don't pull their weight. 
I made this argument in my original piece and took some stick for it. However, 
the fact remains that, however uncomfortable it makes us feel, there are some 
people teaching that quite simply shouldn't be. These teachers can be 
characterised as those that start work as late as possible and leave as early. 
However, to state that all teachers who leave at 3pm are, somehow, not working 
as hard or as long as those that stay on until 5pm, 6pm or even 7pm is a 
slander.

Just when did we become a clock-in and clock-out profession? Well we haven't 
and we shouldn't.

I'm going to throw something out there. Maybe the man or woman you see, 
urgently, packing their bag together as they fly out the school gate at 3:15pm, 
are on their way to pick up a child from nursery. Maybe, because of financial 
restraints, it isn't possible for them to have one parent off work to look 
after tiny Tim. Maybe, the only way they can continue to make ends meet is by 
saving a small amount of money by not keeping tiny Tim in nursery an extra two 
hours a day. The fact is, none of us know why they are rushing out, none of us 
should know. It is no-one else's business. As long as your colleague is doing 
their job, books marked, lessons planned, children taught and assessed then it 
shouldn't matter.

In fact, you might find that those teachers who leave at 3pm (his assertion 
not mine) are actually working late into the evening to cover their inability 
to stay in school for longer. Almost every teacher I know works late into the 
evening, marking books and planning for the forthcoming weeks. This doesn't 
cover the hours spent during weekends and holidays doing the same thing. Most 
teachers spend as much time outside of the classroom doing their jobs as they 
do inside.

Unfortunately for Wilshaw and Gove, the 3pm teacher generalisation doesn't fit 
today. However, their statements allow the ironmongers of dissension to wield 
their freshly sharpened axes once again at hardworking teachers. The 
calumniation has been around for generations; hanging from the professions neck 
like a millstone. Instead of Wilshaw and Gove coming in and helping to 
eradicate it, they perpetuate the defamation much to our chagrin.

There are many things they could do to help blunt axes. The simplest 
suggestion would be to try supporting teachers not lambasting them. Employ the 
same techniques that we employ in the classroom. Praise the majority for doing 
an outstanding job and then tackle the troublemakers in an appropriate manner. 
Don't keep us all behind for detention.

Another suggestion would be that, in this age of rebranding, we rebrand the 
holidays. Let's keep calling it 'the holidays' for the students but for 
teachers let's say it how it generally is, working from home. Granted, that 
isn't a catchy name so we would need to call it something else. We could call 
it The Planning Period. I clearly shouldn't work in advertising.

My final suggestion is another simple one - take some lessons in how to speak 
to people or at least get some media training. Both figures are not going to be 
able to achieve all they want to with education if they continue on their 
current trajectory of alienation. If they don't, they might need to speak to 
the axe-grinders about procuring some shields.

Mike Britland is head of ICT at a comprehensive school in Bournemouth. He has 
been teaching for eight years. Follow him on Twitter@mikematthewscdn 
<https://twitter.com/#%21/mikematthewsCDN>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. Sign up to the Guardian 
Teacher Network <https://id.guardian.co.uk/register/?INTCMP=ILCJOBTXT9366> to 
get access to more than 100,000 pages of teaching resources and join our 
growing community. Looking for your next role? See ourGuardian jobs for schools 
<http://jobs.guardian.co.uk/jobs/education/schools> site for thousands of the 
latest teaching, leadership and support jobs
