
There’s a meme that does the rounds on my colleagues’ Facebook pages from time 
to time – a badge with “You can’t scare me, I’m a social worker” written on it. 
It often appears after a particularly heavy day at work – in this job, you 
sometimes feel like you’re trying to placate half the city.

As with any frontline public service, being a social worker means getting used 
to a working day filled with thinly veiled threats, aggression and straight-up 
odd behaviour.

Understandably, social work evokes strong feelings among individuals and 
families. We see people during the worst and most vulnerable moments in their 
lives. As a consequence, emotions sometimes overflow from meetings and office 
visits through anger and rage. In the comfort of your office, with colleagues 
and security just a locked door away, dealing with the waves of emotion is 
manageable.

Related: My colleague was tied up with a knife to his throat. Social work can 
be dangerous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2015/nov/18/knife-social-work-dangerous-mental-health>

However, social work rarely takes place in a safe office environment. Legally, 
social workers have to complete home visits, which takes you to the 
unpredictable environment of a stranger’s home, often with little more back up 
than a mobile phone and a rape alarm. It was on one such home visit that I felt 
real fear.


As a social worker for a looked after children’s team, I had been asked to 
visit the father of a teenage boy who was running away from his residential 
unit daily. The boy had a mild learning disability and was on the autistic 
spectrum. He loved his dad more than anyone in the world.

Unfortunately, the father had a history of domestic violence and substance 
misuse, which meant that he couldn’t care for his son – instead, the boy often 
parented his father. The aim of my visit was to convince the father to work 
with me to get his son to stop going missing and start attending school again. 
I could already feel the dread in my stomach.

I had met the father on a few occasions, where he had made lewd sexual 
comments towards me or threatened my colleagues with his dogs. He didn’t trust 
the “social” – we had removed all of his children from his care. From his 
perspective, we had left him with nothing.

I had asked for a police escort, but they too were stretched for resources. 
Instead, I insisted that his probation officer attend the meeting with me. We 
arrived and Dad answered the door, his face sweaty and drawn – he was clearly 
under the influence.

Just before we arrived, the probation officer had informed me that one of the 
father’s dogs had attacked someone in a park a few weeks before and he had been 
instructed to muzzle him in public. We weren’t in public. Before entering the 
property we tried to get the man to muzzle the dog. He didn’t. Instead he held 
him by his collar as another dog growled at us from the sofa and a third threw 
itself at the patio doors, barking madly with rage. An unknown man sat on the 
sofa surrounded by empty cider cans.

We asked to go somewhere private, so Dad took us into the kitchen and stood by 
the door. I attempted to share my fears for his son’s well being. As I talked 
the door was abruptly kicked open, and there stood his teenage son, angry, 
upset and high, shouting at me, fearful that I had come to take him away.

The father started shouting at his son, his son shouting at me, while the 
unknown man attempted to placate both of them. The dogs growled and barked 
beneath us. I looked at the probation officer, who was wide-eyed with fear, and 
I thought about unleashing the completely useless rape alarm.

With the father blocking our exit, I attempted to wrap up the visit and 
promised the child that I was only there to talk. The distraction gave us 
enough time to hurry out of the house and speed walk to my car where I locked 
the doors and phoned my manager. The boy walked out of the house and towards my 
car and I quickly drove off while the probation officer phoned the police to 
raise our concerns for the child’s welfare. They didn’t have enough officers to 
visit.

Related: When a mother walked out on her kids, I stayed up all night to save 
the family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/11/social-work-mother-children-distressed>

Over the course of the following month the boy would go missing for days, his 
drug use increased and his attendance at school tailed off. I would drive the 
two hours to the house whenever he turned up, getting a fleeting glimpse of him 
before he ran out of the door. Dad never returned my calls or letters again. 
Two months later, I got permission to apply for a secure order, and the courts 
ordered the boy to be housed at a children’s home. He was later moved to a 
secure mental health facility. Dad is yet to contact him.

The memory of that home visit – the adrenaline rushing through my veins and 
the stare of the probation officer – have remained with me on every visit I 
have been on since. As it turns out, you can scare a social worker a little bit.

 * Rainy Bay is a pseudonym 
This new series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
