



Gavin on Aimee




What were you hoping for?
A science lesson in chemistry.

First impressions?
Polite, prompt and smiling.

What did you talk about?
Work, travel, life, food, food and more food.

Any awkward moments?
Only my display of verbal forthrightness; I didn’t appreciate the waitress 
leaning over me.

Good table manners?
Impeccable.

Best thing about Aimee?
Her love of food.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
I can’t see that it would do any of them any harm.

Describe her in three words
Confident, laid-back, sassy.

What do you think she made of you?
Hopefully, she thought I was a gentleman; smart, kind and funny.

Did you go on somewhere?
Negative.

And… did you kiss?
On the basis of casual formalities.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
Not sure I would. Every experience is unique, so why change it?

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
I don’t see why not.




Aimee on Gavin




What were you hoping for?
A new experience.

First impressions?
Not my usual type lookswise, but interested in his story.

What did you talk about?
His PA – several times. Sadly not gliding, his hobby.

Any awkward moments?
He was upset by the waitress leaning over him to pick up the bottle of wine.

Good table manners?
No faults; it felt very relaxed.

Best thing about Gavin?
His determination to succeed.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
If there was an occasion.

Describe him in three words
Determined, organised, open.

What do you think he made of you?
I hope as a nice, normal girl.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, I had interviews to do the following morning.

And... did you kiss?
Mutual air kiss goodnight.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
That I had ordered the crab BLT – I had food envy.

Related: Blind date: ‘Did we kiss? Oh God, no’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/12/blind-date-craig-callum> 

Marks out of 10?
6 – not my type, but I had an enjoyable evening.

Would you meet again?
Just as friends, especially if he gets a dog, so I can walk it.




• Gavin and Aimee ate at the Andaz Hotel’s Eastway brasserie 
<http://www.andazdining.com/eastway/default-en.html>, London EC2.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial, go to 
soulmates.theguardian.com <http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
