
I’ve long had a suspicion that the happiest people in the workplace are the 
ones who just don’t care as much.

In every office, you’ll encounter a few. They do averagely good work, rarely 
apologise for anything and pack up cheerily at 5.30pm on the dot every day. 
They use their lunch breaks to watch YouTube or sell things on eBay. And they 
always leave after a year and a half, for a better position and more money 
elsewhere. The Johnny That’ll-Dos. The Susan Shrugs-a-lots. I envy them.

Because staring glumly at their backs as they head to the pub is a Katie 
Cares-too-much, and she’s frazzled. Not necessarily from being any better, but 
from worrying far more that she’s not. Her lunch hours are eaten up with extra 
tasks; redrafting emails to nail the perfect breezy yet efficient tone, and 
racing back to her desk to trill “Sorry sorry, Pret was manic!” to people who 
hadn’t even noticed she was gone. I know this, because I’m that person.


She’s more likely to be a she, too. Numerous studies have found workplace 
stress levels to be higher for women – up to 67% higher for women between 34 
and 44, as last year’s study by theHealth and Safety Executive found 
<http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress/stress.pdf>. But that stress 
is not just because we’re more likely to pick up the kids. We’re also picking 
up the emotional slack.

Where is all the pressure coming from?


Clinical psychologist Dr Jessamy Hibberd, co-author of This Book Will Make You 
Calm <http://www.amazon.co.uk/This-Book-Will-Make-Calm/dp/1848662831> explains 
that workplace anxiety results from a mixture of external demands (work you’re 
given by others) and internal demands. “These are the pressures you place on 
yourself,” she says. “For example, checking and rechecking work, spending too 
long on each task, taking work home and setting excessively high standards.”

Related: Overwhelmed? 10 ways to feel less busy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/26/overwhelmed-10-ways-feel-less-busy>

Talking to school friends about their work woes (office politics, inconsistent 
managers, unreasonable workloads – the full megamix) makes me wish that 
somewhere along the way, we’d been taught not to care quite as much. As 
promising students we were told ‘aim high! Join in! You can do anything!’ – but 
nobody thought to mention we could also aim lower, opt out or do exactly what 
our pay cheque required and no more.

While muting our devices, streamlining our social lives and shaking off the 
haters have fast become new ambitions for the 21st century, can we also shrug 
off our once-steely work ethic and say ‘pfft ... that’s good enough’?

One fan of caring less is Sarah Knight, reformed overachiever and author of 
The Life Changing Magic of Not Giving a F**k 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Life-Changing-Magic-Not-Giving/dp/0316270725> – a 
parody of Marie Kondo’s famous tidying up bible that promises, rather than 
rearranging our drawers, to declutter our minds.


Knight has had more than one boss in her career tell her she cares too much. 
“For a long time, I couldn’t figure out whether it was a veiled insult or a 
piece of advice,” she says. “I would often look around at my co-workers – 
mostly the men – and think, how are they not reacting to all this bullshit?” 

How indeed, when water off one duck’s back can feel like enough to drown 
another? “I think one important part of caring less is not catering to the male 
ego,” says Hazel, 28, an advertising account manager who is used to working in 
male-dominated teams.


“One way I found to keep myself going in my last job was realising that the 
male managers who were making my life difficult were in a testosterone-filled 
environment that encouraged them to shout the loudest, whether it was helpful 
or not. I thought ‘is that how I want to be?’ and ultimately, the answer was 
no.”


What else can I do to become unbothered?


Dr Jessamy advises: “Rather than caring about everything, choose what’s most 
important and let go of the pressure on the things that don’t matter to you so 
much.” And so for the past week I have tried to let go of a list that includes: 
sounding pleasant in emails; sounding clever in meetings; how many retweets I 
get; whether I offer to make people tea enough; whether subeditors hate me; 
whether I should be trying to write a book, or at least trying to read one; 
whether I write too little about serious issues that matter and too much about 
custard and 90s pop culture. But everyone’s list will be different.

Knight advocates ducking out of professional life’s more pointless rituals, 
like conference calls. “I have never been on a conference call where something 
actually got decided or accomplished,” she says. So during the last year or so 
of her corporate life, she has simply said she can’t make it and will catch up 
with the people on the call later. She hasn’t missed anything important and has 
gained hours of productivity.

“If you can free up your mental clutter from the less important things, you’re 
bound to have more time and energy for the kinds of accomplishments and 
relationships that lead to greater success,” says Knight.“But I’ve stopped 
caring quite so much about what other people perceive as success anyway.”


Talk to us on Twitter via @GdnWomenLeaders 
<https://twitter.com/GdnWomenLeaders> and sign up 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> to become a member of 
the Women in Leadership network and receive our newsletter
