 Wiser voices have attempted to counsel that this is not the most appropriate 
opinion to be offering today. But it seems to me that a substantial proportion 
of the population has had no say in the past week: has, indeed, been actively 
discouraged from expressing any opinion that deviates from the acceptable. For 
we are, so we are told, devastated. We are inconsolable. We are part of a 
nation that grieves.
Truth be told, we are mystified. Obviously, there is shock, and there is 
sadness, and this should go without saying. AJP Taylor, in his Struggle for 
Mastery in Europe, faced a related problem when he found himself constantly 
writing 'except Italy' in the context of the Great Powers, Italy being the 
annoying exception to every generalisation he made. The inspired solution was a 
footnote asking readers, every time they read of the Great Powers, to imagine 
the parenthesised phrase 'except Italy'.

So, from now on, please take as read the parenthesised phrase: This is an 
appalling tragedy to befall Diana and those close to her, and they deserve 
heartfelt sympathy.

But some of us don't feel completely numb. Some of us have not wept. That this 
seems an outrageous admission says much, none of it particularly healthy, about 
the inviolacy of grief. Nothing must be allowed to be said, or done, or felt 
which doesn't wholly fulfil media expectations of grieving, expectations which 
spiralled with each competing punter interviewed until, with terrifying logic, 
there were public calls for the Queen to 'Cry, Ma'am'.

I don't want to be told what to feel, and don't believe others should be 
either. I was brought up to understand that grief, like love, was personal, and 
all the stronger for it.

This public-enforced outpouring, in such a media age, has three aspects to it 
which are downright unhealthy. First, it brings attendant censorship of any 
views not deemed sufficiently black-bordered. Something similar happened after 
Dunblane. Last week, again, anyone who dared break ranks risked similar howls 
of outrage. (A related admission: Last Saturday, while writing Mrs Blair's 
Diary and running short, as ever, of both time and inspiration, I stuck in a 
cheap Diana crack, in a bit of the paper that couldn't be redone at 4am. OK, 
extremely bad timing; but the only thing more shocking than the outraged 
letters was the assumption that this was either put in or left in deliberately. 
I mean, honestly. Of course it was an accident. Newspapers are accidents).

The second unhealthy aspect is its most obvious manifestation: the crowds, and 
their potential. Some of the more lunatic aspects, the visions and portents 
already being hailed, can be written off as temporary mass hysteria, and so 
should they be; otherwise we might as well all lurch straight back to 
pre-Enlightenment days, burn a few witches, burst a few buboes, flatten out our 
globes and have done with it.

But the third, more subtle worry about the grieving revolves not around the 
visionary loons hitting the headlines but the number of sane, intelligent, 
compassionate people across Britain, in the crowds, some even behind the 
cameras, who are obviously moved absolutely beyond words, for whom this tragedy 
has been shattering. I honestly hadn't understood how many people truly treated 
Diana as an icon. And I don't know how healthy it is for so many people to have 
an icon, for so many to have adored someone they had never met and, it appears, 
lived their lives vicariously through her.

Perhaps it's background. Scots didn't celebrate the wedding much, it coming at 
a time when Margaret Thatcher was doing to their country what Charles was about 
to do to Diana. Perhaps it's wariness at the parallels with America, a country 
that reveres its modern icons with lurid abandon, yet which is hardly a model 
for mental health.

If I think of Diana, it will be privately, with sadness and not a little 
respect. But I won't be told what to think, either by mawkish bombardment with 
honest but banal tributes, or by the absurd reworking of anthemic songs, or by 
the baying of the mob.
