
In 2014, the Daily Mail ran a story headlined: “At last! Victory on secret 
courts: Rulings in family cases to be made public after Mail campaign 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2540919/At-Victory-secret-courts-Rulings-family-cases-public-Mail-campaign.html>
”. The article trumpeted: “Councils applying to take children into care can no 
longer hide behind a cloak of anonymity.”

The Mail said “new rules” directed “future judgments in the family courts must 
be made public except in cases where there is a clear reason to dictate they 
should not be”. Well, not quite. What was actually behind the headlines was a 
guidance document 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/transparency-in-the-family-courts-jan-2014-1.pdf>
 [pdf] issued by Sir James Munby, president of the family division and a 
well-known champion of transparency.

Related: Adoption and child protection: are councils misusing a key part of 
the law? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/10/adoption-child-protection-law-section-20>

The guidance spelt out for judges what kinds of judgments in family cases they 
should publish and when they should do so. It anticipated routine anonymisation 
and was intended to prompt a wide change in practice and a significant increase 
in the publication of judgments. Munby’s hope was this would improve public 
understanding and confidence in the court system.

There is a long, unhappy history of why these changes were brought in via 
guidance not law. Making family cases more transparent is a huge legislative 
and political headache. Parliament last tried (and failed) in 2010, so judges 
were left to grapple with the problem themselves without law reform or 
resources behind them.

Two years on, the guidance hasn’t seen revolutionary change and has caused a 
number of problems in principle and practice.

Judgments take time to prepare: they must be typed or transcribed, then 
checked, anonymised and rechecked prior to publication. When courts are 
publishing judgments containing intensely private material, anonymisation is 
critical. Judges have no additional time or staff support for these tasks; they 
must be slotted in between hearings.

The number of cases coming through the family courts continues to rise, so the 
pressure to prioritise becomes more acute. Courts are working with skeleton 
staff and anonymisation is either left to the judge or passed on to lawyers, 
who are expected to carry it out without additional pay.

The process is ad hoc and with everyone under pressure, errors are inevitable. 
Recently, anunanonymised judgment 
<http://www.transparencyproject.org.uk/when-transparency-goes-wrong/> relating 
to allegations of sexual abuse of a named child was briefly published. Luckily, 
the mistake was remedied swiftly, but the potential for harm and distress is 
clear.

In some countries where judgments are anonymised before publication, there is 
a dedicated unit, guidelines and checks to ensure mistakes of this sort don’t 
happen. In England and Wales , a research project is under way to draft 
guidelines for anonymising judgments, but this presupposes that the problem is 
judicial carelessness rather than a lack of resources and processes, so will 
not in itself resolve the problem.

A more common problem, given stretched resources, is significant delays 
between the delivery and publication of judgments, either because a judge has a 
backlog, or because a transcript has got lost in the system. In the “secret 
family courts” they are not waving but drowning.


So what about the Mail article? Matters were never so clear-cut as the 
headline suggested. The transparency guidance said a judgment should be 
published whenever the judge decided it was “in the public interest” to do so. 
Second, it said that certain categories of judgments – decisions to permanently 
remove children from their parents, for example – should be published, unless 
there are compelling reasons against doing so.

Related: Why it's easy to fall foul of our muddled child protection laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/nov/10/child-protection-section-20-muddled-laws>

In each case of this sort the court should be actively considering whether 
there is a good reason not to publish. If there isn’t, that judgment should 
appear on the website of theBritish and Irish Legal Information Institute 
<http://www.bailii.org/>, the organisation responsible for publishing judgments 
online. Even allowing for exceptions in the guidance and some “compelling 
reasons” cases, it’s clear that publication of judgments is just not happening 
consistently.

Some judges haven’t published a thing in the two years since the guidance was 
issued. Have they really found compelling reasons not to publish a judgment in 
every case they have dealt with?

The problem is there are wildly different views about this guidance among 
judges, lawyers, professionals and parents. While some parents are content for 
judgments to be published, many are anxious about details going online, 
anonymous or not.

If a judge is not supportive of the guidance or the lawyers don’t raise the 
issue, the principle of publication is simply forgotten. Even older children 
are not routinely asked about these matters by their lawyers, even though they 
are entitled to a view on the publication of the story of their life.

By contrast, where a council has been criticised for some failing or other, 
you can pretty much guarantee that all parties will be clamouring for 
publication. The judge – having been sufficiently annoyed with the council to 
have expressed their criticisms in writing – will usually agree.

Such judgments should be published, but it can produce skewed results: if a 
judgment critical of the state is more likely to be published than a 
non-critical one, the impression of what is going on in our courts is 
distorted. The public may come to think that every case handled in the family 
courts is a case of social work failure and incompetence.

This is why the neglected second strand of the guidance is vital: it 
recognises the inherent public interest in open justice through the routine 
publication of judgments, as opposed to the specific public interest in a 
report of an individual case. Surely it is just as much in the public interest 
to read about a run-of-the-mill case where the state has discharged its 
functions responsibly as a newsworthy one where things have gone wrong?

Related: ​The young mothers trapped in a cycle of having babies removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jan/07/young-mothers-trapped-cycle-babies-removed>

This ad hoc, partial and risky version of transparency was not what the 
guidance intended to promote. The past two years have shown that issuing 
guidance without proper resources, operational procedures and clear lines of 
responsibility is not an effective way to improve public understanding of the 
court process.

Instead, we should have clear rules of court, or primary legislation, that 
make plain judgments will be published in anonymised form unless there is a 
good reason not to. The onus is then on the person who wants to restrict 
publication.

There will sometimes be reasons not to publish, and in those cases the issue 
can be flagged and the court can decide. Let there be proper processes to get 
anonymisation right; transparency need not jeopardise privacy if done properly. 
This requires resources, but surely protecting public confidence in the justice 
system is worth it?

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
