
Of all the euphemisms for pregnancy, the happiest by far is “She is 
interesting” because it is so utterly accurate. There are degrees, of course; 
babies very soon, very late, in multiples of more than two at a time, or in 
succession after four, all make their mothers more interesting than those which 
arrive singly at two-year intervals in (say) the first six years of marriage. 
But while no mother of two is likely to embark upon a third with the sole 
object of relieving tedium, it is agreeable, to say the least, to find oneself 
after eighteen years of marriage, interesting to the point of fascination.

Experience warns that the phase is brief: that it will be followed by a 
nightmare period of worry and weariness in which interest will be centred 
exclusively on the new arrival, while its now lumpish mother is “nowt a pound.”


All the more reason then for making the most of it. For delighting in watching 
an initial look of consternation overlaid by conventional expressions of 
pleasure (“Well, if she’s pleased…”); for seeing the mental adding machines go 
into operation (“Why, she must be nearly…!”). For savouring sleep. For finding 
family, friends, fashion, and food so newly absorbing.


The first joy is telling. But when? Not too soon lest the event be greeted by 
the Dorothy Parker ignominy, “We always knew you had it in you.” Not too late 
lest thoughts beginning “Surely she isn’t..” start to flit through minds; not, 
heaven forfend, as a whispered secret to be leaked out. A brief announcement to 
the assembled members of the Women’s Institute at three months seems to fill 
the bill to perfection. I am officially interesting. Next day a huge bunch of 
exquisite lilac arrives from one neighbour, a bundle of her first cutting of 
asparagus from a second, and - the ultimate - a handful of runner beans, 
scarcer by far than gold, from a third. The friend with the car says firmly, 
“No more riding to Communion on That Bike.” “Not so much digging,” says 
another. “No more cement mixing,” floats over the hedge.


Related: There’s nothing wrong with having a baby in your 70s | Aarathi Prasad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/daljinder-kaur-baby-70s> 

It is significant that no advice comes from the doctor, but one knows better 
now than to expect it. The gynaecologist who officiated through the first 
pregnancy, when asked what one should or should not do, thought for a moment, 
then said seriously, “Well, not too many rides on the Big Dipper.”


Accompanied by deep sighs of relief from the donors, equipment comes next. 
Philip’s pram… Elizabeth’s wicker cradle… Jane’s baby plates, together with 
one’s own high chair, which has now completed the full circle of village 
babies. It is newly blue and much smarter than when it left. Undoubtedly the 
most heartening thing is “You do look well,” since it helps to dispel the 
sneaking fear that one might, some day, be mistaken for the child’s grandmother 
(winning the Mothers’ Race at the school sports two years in succession 
notwithstanding). That one is first with the Trapeze is not so much High 
Fashion as sheer good luck.


The news percolates to the city. In the middle of a harassing day at the 
office husband’s door bursts open and a beaming-faced colleague gushes, “Do I 
have to congratulate you?” Puzzled, he tries to remember whether he has lately 
entered for any national competitions, then wonders if perhaps a Premium Bond 
has come up. He is (naturally) disappointed when the truth dawns.


Help at home
At the same time, he decides to put a new set of brake-blocks on That Bike, 
and when the Main Crop is safely in asks solicitously “Are you sure you’re not 
doing too much?” The washing-machine gets wheels, the Edwardian bath a built-in 
side, the hall a mat-well, and the garden a shed. Perhaps the corner of the 
drawing-room wasn’t an ideal place for the motor mower, and we’ll need 
somewhere to keep all the… Like all men he boggles at the operative word.

The twelve-year-old, to whom idioms are not yet clichés, says, “Good heavens, 
another mouth to feed,” and the ten-year-old gives a detailed recital of what 
he will do for the baby, which, if carried out, will relieve me entirely of its 
care. Assure him that in the meantime, if he would just learn to wash his own 
hair…


One is occasionally tempted, when asked “How are you?” to reply in detail, 
just for the fun of watching the resultant expression, but one refrains. There 
is a limit to which one is interesting, and this most assuredly is it. It is 
not as though fun were lacking. What, for instance, made the initially doubting 
doctor choose to say, “For the time being, keep it under your hat?” He of all 
people should have known that wasn’t where I had it.
