
My dad died nearly two years ago, following a very short illness. He lived a 
long way from me and my two sisters after his second marriage, which lasted 18 
years. His divorce from our mother left bitterness with her, but my two sisters 
and I were supportive and visited when we could. 

When he was very ill, we visited and tried to be as helpful as we could. Dad 
had a stepdaughter and son and I always thought we got on, though I did not see 
a lot of them (for some years I lived abroad). The night he died, I travelled 
down with one of my sisters. My stepmother phoned and said we could be with him 
for a while, but then go as she wanted to be alone with him when he died.

I felt devastated by this and felt no one had different rights over Dad at 
this time. The worst part now is that my sister, to whom I am close, felt we 
should say nothing and did not help me to stand up for us. She seemed too 
interested in appearing “nice” to a woman who had no interest in us or our 
feelings. 

My stepmother had always been a very strong, domineering, jealous woman, and 
my father preferred, at times, that we phoned instead to avoid a tense visit. 
We did not oppose her ever in any way, and always felt we got on. For her to 
say we should leave Dad at the end was terrible, and I find myself still going 
over it. I still feel aggrieved that my sister acted as she did, though neither 
of us felt we could cause trouble as it was a quiet hospice.

To make matters worse, at the funeral, I found out that my stepmother called 
her own family and they were with him at the end. We have no contact with her 
now, and none of his possessions. Some have said to me that she was out of her 
mind with grief, but I feel she knew exactly what she was doing.

I’m very sorry that your dad died. I would like to know more about why these 
feelings have cropped up now – not that they shouldn’t have, but sometimes the 
process of grief means that things get thrown up many years after the actual 
death. But I wondered if there had been a specific trigger recently.

I spoke to Cruse Bereavement Care (cruse.org.uk <http://www.cruse.org.uk/>, 
0844 477 9400) to talk generally aboutgrief 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/10/a-dirty-secret-called-grief>
.

The way your stepmother behaved was not seemingly loving, helpful or 
empathetic. But, to be absolutely fair, we don’t know how she felt or what was 
going on with her.

One of the things that can happen when someone dies is that those left behind, 
once they have got over the initial shock, can then think about all the things 
they could have done differently. Given that we can’t control death, what we 
hope for is the “perfect death” for the people we love. I don’t know a single 
person who has lost a loved one who doesn’t have some regret, because death is 
so final – there’s no going back and fixing things. That can be really hard to 
deal with, which in turn brings guilt, and guilt can cause us to blame others 
(rightly or wrongly).

Everyone grieves differently and if someone grieves in a very different way, 
it can lead to further misunderstanding and alienation.

Even if his whole stepfamily was with him on his deathbed, that does not 
replace what you meant to him

The other thing to remember is that your father was about more than just his 
death. You had a full life with him. Could you allow yourself to zoom out a 
little bit and see the whole picture with all the times you spent time with him 
and when things were good?

When emotions are running high, it can help to break things down to 
practicalities. Realistically, what could you have done differently? I think if 
you really look at it you will see that you couldn’t. You didn’t make a fuss at 
the hospice to be respectful to your dad – not to appease your stepmother, for 
him – and that is a valid reason. Even if his whole stepfamily was with him on 
his deathbed, that doesnot replace what you meant to him or your place in his 
life.

Cruse explained that grief is a continuation of love, which is a rather 
lovely way of looking at something none of us can avoid. I feel you would 
benefit from talking to someone. Cruse has a great helpline and local groups or 
you may want to find a private counsellor who specialises in bereavement.

I know you might feel that talking is painful – and that you have talked to 
someone already, but I think talking to someone outside the family will help 
you to be heard – which is what I think matters here. I’ve put some links to 
useful further reading below, which you may find helpful.

cruse.org.uk/publications/fact-sheets 
<http://www.cruse.org.uk/publications/fact-sheets>
cruse.org.uk/publications/recommended-books 
<http://www.cruse.org.uk/publications/recommended-books>
tinyurl.com/pcwhumf 
<http://www.cruse.org.uk/sites/default/files/default_images/pdf/Free-leaflets/Restoringhope.pdf>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
