
David Cameron’s promise of 30 hours of free childcare a week for nursery-age 
children is in jeopardy because too few early-years providers are willing to 
offer places, parliament’s spending watchdog has found.

Under an initiative outlined by the prime minister during the general election 
campaign, the current entitlement of 15 hours of free care for three- and 
four-year-olds is supposed to be doubled by next year.

But the public accounts committee said there was a real risk that childminders 
and nurseries would decide not to offer the extended hours because of concerns 
they would be left out of pocket.


“Evidence suggests this would most affect families from disadvantaged areas, 
which is doubly concerning given the already disappointing take-up of funded 
places for disadvantaged two-year-olds,” said the committee’s chair, Meg 
Hillier.

“The government must take responsibility for identifying the reasons for this, 
and take remedial action. This needs to be in tandem with tackling weaknesses 
in the current system, in particular obstructions to parents taking advantage 
of the help and services available.”

The cross-party group of MPs also said parents were receiving “unacceptable 
variations” in information, with some reporting that nurseries and childminders 
would only offer the entitlement on the condition that parents pay for 
additional hours.

The Conservatives made the 30-hour pledge in their manifesto last year and, 
last June, Cameron announced he would bring the plan forward in the childcare 
bill so that parents would see benefits as early as 2016.

The free childcare would be available to up to 600,000 families and worth 
around £5,000 a year, including the £2,500 value of existing free childcare 
offers.

Cameron said at the time: “We are pressing ahead with these reforms so that 
not a moment is lost in getting on with the task, going further than ever 
before to help with childcare costs, helping hardworking families and giving 
people the opportunity to get into work.”

The committee examined a National Audit Office report on the scheme and 
questioned witnesses including childcare providers.

The MPs’ report says: “Private and voluntary providers report that the amount 
they currently get paid for providing free childcare is not enough to cover 
their costs and they therefore rely on charging parents for additional hours or 
other sources of income to meet them.

“There is a risk that providers, who can choose whether or not to offer 
parents ‘free’ childcare, will choose not to offer the new entitlement of a 
further 15 hours because doing so would reduce their opportunity to charge 
parents for hours outside of the entitlement.”

The committee recommends that the Department for Education (DfE) use pilots of 
the scheme to test whether nurseries and childminders are able to meet the 
expected demand.

The report raises concerns that the DfE has no method for checking how local 
councils are managing childcare in their areas. Funding is given to authorities 
for free childcare based on the number of eligible children locally. Councils 
use their own formulas to allocate funding to nurseries and childminders, and 
can keep some to pay for central services.

The amount that providers receive varies by area, with some getting £2.28 an 
hour for a three- or four-year-old and others getting £7.15.

“The department does not know how local authorities use the centrally retained 
funding or what they do to manage their childcare markets to ensure there are 
enough places to meet demand,” the report says.

It adds: “There are unacceptable variations in the amount of information 
available to parents about access to free childcare.”

Nurseries are being encouraged to stay open for longer to offer funded places 
for three- and four-year-olds between 6am and 8pm. The maximum funded session 
length will remain at 10 hours.

Neil Leitch, chief executive of the Pre-school Learning Alliance, said: “The 
public accounts committee is absolutely right to warn that there may not be 
enough providers willing to deliver the 30-hour free childcare offer next year 
if government does not address the sector’s concerns. Independent research 
commissioned by the alliance has shown that, even with the increased average 
rates promised by government, there is still likely to be a significant 
shortfall in funding when the scheme rolls out in 2017.

“Add to this the fact that many providers simply do not have the capacity to 
deliver extra childcare places, and it is clear that without urgent action many 
parents who have been promised 30 hours of free childcare may not actually be 
able to access them next September.”

A Department for Education spokesman said: “We are committed to supporting 
hardworking families and nothing shows this better than our landmark 30-hour 
free childcare offer.

“We have seen huge demand from local areas to take part in delivering that 
offer a year early, so we know childcare providers and local authorities want 
to help hardworking families too - and take-up of our existing offer for 
families of three and four-year-olds and disadvantaged families with 
two-year-olds has continued to increase.

“We will continue to work closely with providers as we get ready to provide 
this offer across the country in September 2017, backed up by our record 
investment into the childcare sector.”
