
We have given Sam an ultimatum. Try to find a job or find somewhere else to 
live. When I try it out on friends they have one of two reactions. Either an 
outraged "You can't throw your son out of the house", or a pitying "How 
terrible but what else can you do?" Sam is 22 and, strictly speaking, the 
ultimatum is given in the knowledge he can stay with his grandmother. Could we 
give it otherwise? I don't think so. I would be terrified of forcing him, 
penniless on to the streets.

I had a letter from a reader a few months ago saying that I should be careful 
how I write about Sam. How calling him feckless (which at the time was written 
with affectionate exasperation) would not help my relationship with him. So I 
hesitate to write about my son again except that what I write is as much about 
me as him. And while I could tell you about Flora who is enchanting us all with 
her baby laughter, it's my boy who preoccupies me. It's my boy who as a baby 
looked remarkably like Flora does now, who gives me this ache in the pit of my 
stomach.

So, first, I love him as much I do all my other children. He has – friends and 
family will say – some lovely ways. He has never done anything bad, has a 
talent for music and is personable and kind to his grandmas. But he has never 
had a proper job since leaving school at 16 and in fairness is unlikely to in 
today's economic wasteland. Does this matter? Perhaps not if he helped just a 
little around the house, if he was awake during the day instead of playing 
online poker all night, if he didn't disappear for a few days at a time and 
pitch up, having lost his keys again, at some random, inconvenient time. If he 
worked harder on his music (or on pretty much anything except online gambling), 
then we would support him. We would also feel better if he understood that some 
families could not afford to keep him.

But while the adults in Sam's life fret about what's best to do for him, he 
sees this as our problem. If we could relax and stop getting at him, everything 
would be fine. So while the adults try to get him up in the mornings, print off 
job applications for him and try to bribe him to do as we think he should, he 
is wonderfully resistant. He refuses to engage in any of it, repeating, like a 
worn record, "Don't worry, I'm getting things sorted out."

Some friends say he'll grow out of it. "I have friends whose son is like that 
and still living with them and he's 30," says another. My dentist, who has met 
Sam and likes him, insists I should try tough love and let him live on the 
streets. "He's playing poker with you," he says, "He doesn't think you'll throw 
him out." I flinch at the words "throw out" which suggest Sam is some bag of 
rubbish I want to dispose of. Yet he seems so unmotivated. He can't be happy in 
the life he's leading. But he looks pretty happy when he's going out with his 
mates.

So what have I done wrong? Did I take my eyes off him when I had other 
children, do I want him to be made in my own image? At a New Year's Eve party a 
woman expresses concern that I have five children. "How do you get to show each 
of them enough love?" she asks. And at times like this I worry very much that I 
haven't.

I show this to Sam and ask if it's OK to print it. He laughs. "Well, it's all 
true isn't it?" he says. "It's not as though people don't know I play poker. 
And I have been doing more music lately."

I ask if there is anything he'd like changed and he says no. Then we hug and I 
feel that maybe, one day, things might turn out all right.
