
Tavola is a small shop in Westbourne Grove, west London, that carries a big 
clout. The front is crowded with Sicilian lemons and scarlet plum tomatoes, fat 
bulbs of fennel, boxes announcing the delights of chocolate truffles and the 
like.

The inside is crowded, too. The shelves are stacked with fine olive oils, 
vinegars of high provenance, nam pla and soya sauces, tins of this and that, 
bottles and boxes in neat array. There's a counter stacked with cheeses and 
salamis, a display of superior tableware and cookware, and there, running down 
the centre, are the cooked foods - scarlet peppers stuffed with white 
mozzarella, squelchy braised fennel, chicken liver pâté, chicken curry, braised 
rabbit. There is a sense of trim order, of epicurean selection and 
old-fashioned insistence on quality married to an unerring eye for tasteful 
metropolitan retailing. This is Alastair Little's shop. Strictly speaking, it 
is Alastair and Sharon Little's shop, because Sharon was the prime mover behind 
Tavola.

There was a time when Alastair, along with Rowley Leigh and Simon Hopkinson, 
formed a kind of Three Musketeers of London restaurateuring. They were in the 
vanguard of the movement to throw off the stifling hand of the French fine 
dining experience, and opened up a world of great food to the masses. 
Gastropubs are the spiritual children of Kensington Place, Bibendum and 
Alastair Little (the restaurant as well as the man).

That was about 25 years ago. A conversation I had the other day set me 
thinking along the lines of, "Where are they now?" or rather, "Why are they 
still at it?" because, with the exception of Simon, they are all still cutting 
the mustard at the cooking coalface.

Alastair was characteristically down-to-earth about it. "I'm still at it of 
necessity," he says. "I need a job and I've got a family to support."

He looks just a touch older than when I last saw him, fuller in the face and a 
little more grizzled around the chops, and contented. He is, he says. "I'm 
well. I'm happily married with a little boy who's about to be four." And a very 
successful shop which, dare I say, defines the zeitgeist of the W11 food 
culture.

It's been open five years now. "Sharon wanted to open a shop, with tableware 
and stuff like that, and I said, 'Well, let's do tableware and a bit of food.' 
Then the food took over. Now it's going the other way, which is a good thing."

He no longer has any connection with the restaurant that bears his name in 
Soho. So would he start a restaurant again?

"No. I'm like Steven Redgrave. If I look as if I'm going back into a 
restaurant, shoot me. I couldn't abide doing service these days."

It seems curious, for someone whose reputation stood so high for so long among 
metropolitan foodistas, that this never translated into media stardom and 
commercial riches. "I peaked too early in terms of fame," he says ruefully. 
"Once Rowley and I tried to get on TV, but we came across like the odd couple, 
a gay version of the odd couple at that."

Alastair has kept his restless culinary curiosity and open-mindedness. He's 
just come back from Australia. "I've always wondered why their fusion food is 
better than ours. Of course, their fusion food isn't really fusion food at all. 
It's a pukka dish, particular to Australia, cooked with great rigour."

Rigour. That seems to me to be the right word to describe Alastair's approach 
to cooking, and that of Rowley and Simon, too. They are sticklers for correct 
culinary usage. Not for them Delia's sellout to cheating your way around the 
kitchen. It's time for him to get back to doing what he does best, likes doing 
best. "Stop me cooking and I start twitching in a couple of days." That's good 
news for the discerning eaters of Notting Hill. And for the rest of us, come to 
that.

Where to get it

Tavola 155 Westbourne Grove, London W11, 020-7229 0571
