
More than four out of five people believe the law should be changed to allow 
for “no fault divorces” following the irretrievable breakdown of a marriage, 
according to a survey.


The Conservative MP Richard Bacon presents a private member’s bill in the 
Commons on Friday seeking changes to the 1973 Matrimonial Causes Act 
introducing an extra ground for legal separation.


Online research commissioned by the family law firm Vardags and carried out by 
OnePoll found that 85% of people questioned believed no fault divorce – where 
neither party has to admit wrongdoing – should be available.


At present, married couples seeking divorce have to provide the courts with 
evidence of adultery, unreasonable behaviour, desertion or separation without 
consent.


Bacon’s bill states that, additionally, a court should be able to grant a 
divorce if it is satisfied there is “an individual statement from each party 
that the marriage has broken down irretrievably, signed freely and 
independently.”


Resistance to no fault divorces has come from religious groups who fear any 
change to existing legislation would further loosen the bonds of marriage. One 
Christian organisation has described no fault divorce as making it “easier to 
get out of a marriage than a hire purchase agreement”.


London has been hailed as the divorce capital of the world because of its 
50-50 division of assets in divorce, with no discrimination between breadwinner 
and homemaker. The survey found that 60% of people oppose this approach and 
support the view that the main earner should receive more than the homemaker 
upon divorce.

Ayesha Vardag, head of the law firm, said: “Our legal system is hallowed by 
many as the best in the world, and rightly so, yet our findings show that 
current laws do not reflect what people believe is fair and just.


“The public want divorce to be made easier and to take the blame game out of 
play. We champion that. If they want a divorce they’ll get one. But right now 
you have to pin the blame for it on your partner, on the record, even if you 
want to part amicably, or hang about for two years with all sorts of dire 
practical consequences.


“Forcing decent human beings through an expensive, destructive, utterly 
artificial exercise in mudslinging just to salve the consciences of the 
anti-divorce lobby is incredibly damaging, especially to the family, and sets 
the tone for battle not brokering.”


Resolution, the family law organisation, is backing Bacon’s bill. Its chair, 
Jo Edwards, said: “We know that our current fault-based divorce system achieves 
nothing besides escalating conflict during divorce. It does not act as a 
deterrent, nor does it help couples to salvage their marriage. The latest data 
from the Office of National Statistics shows that 114,720 people divorced in 
England and Wales in 2013, despite fault-based petitions.

“If MPs are serious about reducing family conflict and the trauma that can be 
caused by divorce, I would urge them to support the bill as a welcome step 
towards removing the requirement of fault from divorce.”
