
The price of getting divorced will soar by 34% from Monday as the Ministry of 
Justice raises its fees to pay for the overall cost of administering justice.

 The increase, from £410 to £550, is unlikely to deter many of those 
determined to separate, but it has provoked anger among family lawyers who say 
the amount is far higher than the actual cost of the legal procedure.

Although the rise was anticipated, no date for its introduction has been 
given. The MoJ denied the measure has been rushed in. The additional income is 
to boost funding for the justice system which may face further cuts following 
the latest budget.

 Every divorce petition has to go through the courts. Commenting on the rise 
Jo Edwards, a solicitor and chair of Resolution, the family law organisation, 
said: “As a result of the steep increase, many people currently in the process 
of separating will have received incorrect information as to the charge for 
lodging a divorce petition and, in reality, won’t have time to get their 
petition in before the fee increase takes effect.

“Divorce is … a necessary part of the legal process to bring a relationship to 
an end. Whether people mediate, negotiate their own outcome or go to court, 
they have to pay the divorce petition fee. The actual cost of the 
administrative process has been shown to be £270, meaning that at new rates the 
MoJ is making a profit of more than 100% – in effect, levying a divorce tax.

“The 34% increase may lead to people unable to afford the fee remaining 
legally and financially tied to their former partner long after the 
relationship has ended.

“Increasing fees will disproportionately impact women, who constitute 
two-thirds of those initiating divorce proceedings. The extent of the rise 
could, as the judiciary and others have warned, lead to women being trapped in 
unhappy or violent marriages.”

Toby Hales, a partner in the family team at the law firm Seddons, said: “The 
34% hike in divorce fees is yet another example of a government with a total 
lack of regard for the fundamental right of equal access to justice. The 
figures seem to be pulled from thin air and only serve to limit access to a 
court system that faces increasingly unmanageable levels of demand.

 “The hike demonstrates an utter disdain for the individual within the divorce 
process, as well as contempt for governmental transparency – a lack of impact 
assessment or announcement underlines this.” 
 <>

In January, Sir James Munby, the judge in charge of the family courts, asked 
the justice select committee: “Can we continue putting fees up until it becomes 
another poll tax on wheels? Those who want to divorce will probably still do so 
through gritted teeth but it doesn’t mean you can keep on putting up the fees.”

By comparison, he said, it cost around £100 to register a marriage. “People 
will see that it doesn’t cost six or eight times as much to get divorced as it 
does to get married.”

One of the first legal services to go online under government modernisation 
plans, he pointed out, was likely to be divorce. “It won’t take long to work 
out that the cost of administering it online is a fiction,” he added.


The MoJ said that in some cases there is a remission scheme to help those who 
cannot afford to pay the full fees.

A spokesperson said: “Fees are never popular, but they are necessary if we are 
to reduce the burden of the courts and tribunals on the taxpayer. We have 
sought to protect the vulnerable at every stage. That is why we have a 
remission scheme to protect and help those who cannot afford to pay. These fee 
increases have not been brought forward; they are being introduced on schedule.”



