
My mother, Rosemary MacDonald, who has died aged 78, left school at 14 but 
went on to become a passionate advocate of education in all its forms. Just 
before her 50th birthday, she graduated from Edinburgh University, and became a 
university administrator.

Born and brought up in Romford, Essex, by her staunchly Conservative and 
working-class parents, Lilian (nee Andrews) and Alexander Adams, a policeman, 
Rosemary grew up accepting an unequal society and her position in it.

An indifferent scholar, she greeted with joy the day she left Bush Elms county 
secondary school. However, a living had to be earned and Rosemary was sent by 
her father to Mulley’s Commercial School in Romford to learn shorthand and 
typing. She progressed to the Civil Service Typing School, with day release for 
her general education to West Ham Polytechnic.

On her first day at West Ham, Rosemary came home in tears, having been bawled 
at for not being able to spell. Despite this inauspicious start, her spelling 
improved and she discovered that learning could be fun. That it could also be 
empowering was to come much later.

Her civil service secretarial career was unceremoniously dumped for a dashing 
young Scotsman, Ian Main MacDonald, a paratrooper serving with the fiance of 
her typing pool companion, Doreen. Rosemary and Ian met in February 1957 at a 
bar near King’s Cross station, and married in December that year.

The highlights of their first 20 years together included riding a motorcycle 
and sidecar in the Scottish Highlands, the birth of two children, 
life-threatening illnesses, hiding from bailiffs and a battle for financial 
survival.

Moving to Midlothian, Scotland, in 1979, Conservative-voting Rosemary found 
herself in the heart of a mining community shortly to be at war with Margaret 
Thatcher. Rosemary was in turmoil. “Could it,” she wrote, “be true that 
apparently not everyone agrees that Labour (with a Big L) is the enemy of the 
state? ... And who is this guy Marx?”

The transformation was incremental and irreversible; by her own admission, she 
never voted Conservative again. The Guardian started to appear on the kitchen 
table and was to remain her paper of choice.

Having left school with no qualifications, Rosemary enrolled to read social 
sciences at Edinburgh University. On graduating, she served with pride and 
passion in her subsequent job at the university, progressing from a junior 
secretary in the department of education to executive assistant to the director 
of human resources.

Empowered and emboldened by learning, Rosemary left her husband of 30 years 
with no illusions about the enduring financial hardship this would entail. She 
was keen to empower others too, volunteering as a literacy tutor in Edinburgh, 
leading chair-based exercises in care homes in Leith and undertaking work on 
mental health and wellbeing for older people. She was also a member of the 
Older Person’s Equality Forum, a body consulted by Edinburgh city council on 
policies that affect older residents.

Rosemary is survived by me, by her son, Fergus, and granddaughters, Ella and 
Daisy.
