
The Labour party is set to lose more than £1m a year after George Osborne 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> announced plans for a 19% 
cut in state funding for opposition parties.

The chancellor was accused of attempting a “despicable rigging of the 
political system” byLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> after 
his autumn statement included proposals to slash the funding pot known as 
“Short money”.

The money is named for the former minister Edward Short, who devised the 
system in 1974 to compensate opposition parties for not having access to 
Whitehall resources.

The move will hit the finances of Labour, the SNP, the Lib Dems, Greens and 
other smaller parties. The text of the spending review confirms that “the 
government proposes to reduce Short money allocations by 19%, in line with the 
average savings made from unprotected Whitehall departments over this spending 
review”.

Allocations will then be frozen in cash terms for the rest of the parliament, 
removing the automatic increase in line with inflation. Policy development 
grant allocations will also be reduced by a similar proportion.

Osborne will now either have to get the proposal through a committee of MPs on 
which the Speaker sits – and the Tories have no majority – or a vote of the 
whole House of Commons.

Chris Bryant, the shadow leader of the House of Commons, said it was 
“despicable” and urged the chancellor to think again. “We were generous to the 
Conservatives when we were in power because good government needs a strong 
opposition,” he said. “I think there will beConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> who will also be thinking 
that what goes around comes around.”

Bryant said he would be more inclined to think favourably about the proposal 
if the Conservatives were reducing the cost of their own special advisers.

The government said Short money for all opposition parties had risen from 
£6.9m in 2010-11 to £9.3m in 2015-16. Labour pointed out that the cost of 
special advisers for Conservative government ministers had gone up from £5.9m 
in 2009 to £8.4m last year.

A spokeswoman for the Labour party said: “This is another anti-democratic move 
by the Tories. Having already attacked the rights of working people they’re now 
coming forward with partisan moves to hit their opposition and give themselves 
another unfair advantage.

“If the Tories were really serious about cutting the cost of politics they 
would start with the bill for Tory special advisers which has rocketed under 
David Cameron.”
