
Across England, a flurry of pre-budget meetings with local council leaders is 
currently underway about power sharing from government to local regions and 
counties.

Devolution <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/devolution> discussions, 
largely held behind closed doors, include whether to have regional or county 
mayors, and span parts of the country consideringa deal with Whitehall: 
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, Lincolnshire, Leicestershire, Derbyshire, 
Nottinghamshire, Yorkshire, Cumbria, the Bristol area, Hampshire and more. 
Cornwall agreed a devolution deal without a mayor last year.

What’s on offer is a new national/local partnership, reducing Whitehall 
powers, and passing decisions to councils and communities. So it matters that 
local people have a say on changes that could transform the way local decisions 
are made. At the heart of the government’s offer is their pre-condition that 
areas seeking devolution agree to have directly elected executive mayors. But 
time is short, with agreed deals to be announced by George Osborne in the 16 
March budget, before all ministers switch to EU referendum mode.


Mayors are not new. Our city of Cambridge has had its ceremonial mayor for 808 
years, but the new executive mayors are different. They could be responsible 
for key, strategic decisions over transport, roads, rail and where to create 
new jobs or housing.

You’d better be quick in having your say, given the rapid speed of current 
devolution decisions.

Greater London has gained from its two mayors to date, and 16 local councils 
already have elected executive mayors in the London boroughs of Lewisham and 
Tower Hamlets, as well as Watford, Doncaster and Torbay. This has attracted 
impressive post holders showing commitment and skill in leading their 
communities. In London, the city’s mayor has since 2000 filled the gap in the 
capital’s leadership left after the abolition of the Greater London Council 
(GLC) in 1986.

The 2017 regional mayor elections are planned for six newly re-established 
regions: Greater Manchester, Liverpool city region, the North-East, Sheffield 
city region, Tees Valley and West Midlands.

Mayors could bring about more accountability, but it all depends on how much 
power they have, the commitment of those in the roles to public and business 
engagement, how the mayors are integrated with existing structures, and how 
they connect with local communities.


The further regional and county devolution deals, expected to be announced in 
a fortnight, are a clear change of direction from July 2010 when then 
communities and local government secretary, Eric Pickles, said that “rolling 
back regional government is central to the government’s wider aims of 
transferring power from central government to councils and communities”.


The test will come in 2017, as voter turnout for these new elected mayors will 
determine whether this new extra layer adds democratic legitimacy.

Related: All eyes on Bath as mayoral referendum nears 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/28/all-eyes-on-bath-as-mayoral-referendum-nears>

Will new mayors listen to the public? Will they respond to innovative thinking 
from local communities, businesses, parishes and the groups you belong to? Or 
will they point more to Whitehall and be guided by national policies, 
particularly if engagement and scrutiny are weak?

As Katie Ghose of the Electoral Reform Society wrote this month 
<http://www.redpepper.org.uk/let-the-people-in/>: “Council leaders have been 
under huge pressure to do the deal first and open it up for public scrutiny 
later – there is little time to engage the public. If council leaders have only 
a few weeks there is not even the chance to take decisions through normal 
decision processes before making commitments.”

A key part of devolution is ensuring that it doesn’t create a new layer of 
government whose loyalties could point both upwards to central government and 
locally to communities. What we don’t need is a new layer of bureaucracy, with 
ambiguous loyalties. Central government must pursue devolution in a way that 
engages the public, and allows for local government to do the same.

But you’d better be quick in having your say, given the rapid speed of current 
devolution decisions. Let your local MP and council or your local paper know 
whether you support the devolution for your area, and how it can be improved. 
Like the local government reorganisations of the 1970s and 1980s, the latest 
wave of changes are likely to be with us for a very long time.

Lewis Herbert is a Labour councillor and the leader of Cambridge city council

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
