
Serra da Estrela mountains, Centro 

Good for: design lovers 
The clack of looms can be heard again in the heart of Portugal's highest 
mountain range, where part of an abandoned wool mill has been put back into 
production, helping revive a dying local economy. TheBurel  
<http://burelfactory.com/>factory uses locally sourced wool to produce a felted 
fabric traditionally used for shepherd's cloaks in a very untraditional range 
of colours, including zingy lime, orange and magenta. A guided tour takes you 
through each stage of the process.

As well as selling soft furnishings and stylish accessories from the factory 
and from a shop in Lisbon (iPad case €40, handbags about €115), the owners also 
run a boutique hotel and spa,Casa das Penhas Douradas 
<http://www.casadaspenhasdouradas.pt/> ( doubles from €105). At an altitude of 
1,500m, in the middle of a national park, the area is great centre for walking 
or cycling holidays. You can ski here in winter – the hotel has a bijou ski 
museum with period kit and sporting manuals.

Serra de São Mamede, Alentejo
 Quinta das Lavandas 
Good for: farmstays and pretty villages 
The pathway undulates between row upon row of lavender bushes as you approach 
Quinta das Lavandas <http://www.quintadaslavandas.pt/> (doubles from €80), a 
20-hectare organic farm that produces essential oils and cosmetics. There are 
simple, contemporary rooms to let, and guests can enjoy workshops on using 
lavender and a show garden with 100 varieties of the shrub. Also within easy 
reach are the whitewashed medieval villages of Marvão – on a rocky crag between 
Portugal and Spain with unrivalled views both ways – and Castelo de Vide, 
possibly the best-preserved medieval Jewish quarters in the country.

Parque Natural da Arrábida, Lisbon region
 Rockalot Aqua Bay 
Good for: fresh air and activity 
Just south of the capital, across the Tejo river, Lisbon's backyard is the 
ruggedly handsome Parque Natural da Arrábida, which runs along the coast from 
the small town of Sesimbre to Setúbal and is dominated by its immense granite 
ridge. It's great for wildlife, walking and biking trails. The town of Setúbal 
itself, best known for producing Chelsea manager José Mourinho, makes a good 
base. Swim from the lovely beach at Portinho da Arrábida then head back towards 
town for a squid pizza (€11) atRockalot Acqua Bay 
<https://www.facebook.com/RockalotAcquaBay> in a new development at Albarquel. 
It has great views from the deck and the chef has won Portuguese chef of the 
year twice. This is also a popular starting point for dolphin-spotting boat 
trips.

Ria Formosa, Algarve
 Ria Formosa, Algarve. Photograph: Alamy 
Good for: unspoilt beaches and nature
Most people head west from Faro airport unaware of the peaceful, estuarine 
national park – a twitchers' heaven – on its eastern fringes. The laidback 
fishing town of Olhão feels a world away from Algarve's tourist droves; beyond 
it is the car-free sand island of Culatra and, at the other end, beyond Tavira, 
the sleepy village of Cabañas with its own island beach. Development is 
starting, but for now you'll have the miles of golden sand to yourself. 
Conditions are good for kitesurfing, and there are schools in Cabañas (+51 962 
337 285,kitesurfeolis.com <http://www.kitesurfeolis.com>, half-day session 
€100) and in Tavira. On 10-15 August, Olhão's seafood festival (
festivaldomarisco.com <http://www.festivaldomarisco.com/>) draws mainly local 
crowds for innovative cooking and live music (adults €8, children €3).White 
Terraces <http://whiteterraces.com/white_terraces_places.htm> has apartments 
and townhouses in Olhão from €210 a week.

Belmonte, Centro

Good for: history
Until the enforced conversion and exile by the Spanish Inquisition, Belmonte 
was home to the largest Jewish community in Portugal. Four hundredmarranos, or 
crypto-Jews, continued to practise their faith in secret and were only 
discovered in 1917. Their history is told at the town's Museu Judaico (
mpjh.org/Museums.html <http://mpjh.org/Museums.html>) on Rua da Portela and in 
the restored Jewish quarter, just below the castle walls, where the modern 
synagogue is also open to visitors. Last year parliament granted citizenship to 
the descendents of those Jews who were expelled, as the country comes to terms 
with its past.
