
• Last Wednesday, the day that Victoria Wood’s death was announced, was not 
the Daily Telegraph’s finest hour. Like other papers it had oodles of 
royal birthday coverage ready to run; but unlike them it didn’t tear up the 
planned paper to give Wood priority, and assign her more or equal weight 
alongside the Queen on the front page. Whether because of the rigidity of its 
production process or the passionateness of its monarchism, Thursday’s 
Torygraph ludicrously ended up with no piece about Wood (someone manifestly 
very popular with its readers) until an Allison Pearson appreciation on page 
25, and no news report of her death anywhere.

• The Daily Mail <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>, in contrast, 
reacted with typical flexibility, putting the two women together on the front 
and running four pages on Wood ahead of the prepared eight pages of sunny royal 
pics and gushing tributes. But something was clearly forgotten about amidst the 
hectic rejig until almost too late: a loyal birthday leader. What eventually 
appeared was a one-par piece (ending “many happy returns of the day, Ma’am”) 
awkwardly jammed in at the foot of a five-par leader on the NHS, with its 
brevity, its unflattering position and the strange black block it began with – 
rather than the usual headline, and with no space left between it and the words 
(“ON” and “pledge”) opening the first two lines – all suggesting it might have 
been an afterthought. For a paper with the royal arms on its masthead, this 
looks to have been a narrow escape.

• Blogger Guido Fawkes has a secret benefactor. “Thank you Simon Walters for 
putting my kids through prep school,” he said in aMedia Masters podcast 
<http://www.mediafocus.org.uk/paul-staines>. Fawkes, aka Paul Staines, revealed 
the munificence of the Mail on Sunday political editor when it comes to paying 
tip fees for exclusive stories. Geordie Greig, the paper’s editor, might ask 
how many of the scoops under the award-winning Walters’ name have been handed 
to him on a platter for hard cash.

• The Shame of Giles Coren, as evidenced by his article A Farewell to Palms 
<http://www.esquire.co.uk/culture/news/a9819/giles-coren-masturbation-farewell-to-palms/>
 in the May issue of Esquire, is a subject Monkey only addresses with 
reluctance given the mortifying nature of the novelist, restaurant critic and 
TV presenter’s disgrace. It’s not the central confession in the piece that 
Coren only gave up continually “wanking like a chimp with a hangover” six 
months ago that constitutes the Shame, of course - although stopping “well into 
my late forties”, and after five years of marriage, does seem unusual. No, the 
moment in the printed piece that will have kept the ex-wanker wordsmith awake 
at night is when he used “compliment” instead of “complement” (an error now 
corrected online) - masturbation was “a thing I did while I was waiting for sex 
to begin in my life, and then did alongside sex because it seemed to compliment 
it”. It is clearly possible, given Coren’swell-documented past sweary spats 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jul/23/mediamonkey> about word-choices 
with subeditors, that Esquire’s subs were well aware of his mistake but decided 
to leave it in and hang him out to dry.

• Does anyone on the Telegraph’s Business pages, or in the paper’s top 
editorial team, actually read the daily Alex cartoon that (with Matt and the 
parliamentary sketch) is one of the true-blue title’s few concessions to fun? 
Monkey only asks because in Wednesday’s Alex strip last week the EU referendum 
was said in a chat between bankers to be happening on “July 23rd”, which tends 
to suggest none of them does. No admission of error followed, of course: like 
love in the film Love Story, working on the Telegraph means never having to say 
sorry.

• Jeremy Clarkson <http://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson> has a new 
home in the Sunday Times, and a new picture byline - though not necessarily in 
the sense of one taken recently. Last weekend’s abolition of the News Review 
section after 26 years means Jezza has joined a plethora of other columnists in 
the main paper, an exodus announced in a page 2 flannel panel (“News Review has 
moved”) dominated by a giant first glimpse of the Clarkson new look - chubby 
and rather Guardian-ish in chinos, Corbyn-esque t-shirt and brown pullover, 
looking sideways at the camera, whereas previously he was smilingly turned 
towards it, trimmer and clad in a black shirt with no jersey. Compared with 
recent unposed (often paparazzi) images of the errant petrolhead, however, 
Monkey can’t help noticing that there’s no sign of a bulging belly, or of 
greying or markedly receding hair - in this the photo corresponds to publicity 
shots taken in the early Top Gear years, perhaps a decade ago. Which would make 
a kind of sense: back then, around 2006-08, the Sunday Times was implausibly 
running a Clarkson byline photo that suggested he still looked like an 80s New 
Romantic pop star.
