
We celebrate the great inventors and creators of our era, but if we’re honest, 
don’t we also kind of hate them a bit too? The truth about many blockbuster 
business ideas isn’t simply that they’re brilliant. It’s also that, with 
hindsight, they’re obvious. There’s nothing about the basic concept behind 
Facebook that I couldn’t have dreamed up myself – and yet I can’t help noticing 
it’sMark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg>, 
not me, with the net worth of £25bn. The same questions prompted by all manner 
of ultra-successful apps, games, novels and television formats: “Why didn’t I 
think of that?” Well, sheer luck is definitely part of it: you can’t just 
decide to have a “Eureka!” moment. But there may be ways to seriously boost 
your chances.

Perhaps the biggest obstacle to having a breakthrough idea is the way we 
romanticise breakthrough ideas – starting with the original “Eureka!” moment: 
Archimedes’ famous insight in the bath, which almost certainly never occurred. 
Instead, as the Nobel prize-winning biochemist Linus Pauling once put it, the 
way to get good ideas is to “have a lot of ideas and throw the bad ones away”. 
Begin a daily practice of listing 10 ideas, no matter how rubbish, advises the 
author and entrepreneur James Altucher. Then throw the list in the bin: the 
point is to build the idea-muscle, not to invest emotionally in any single 
notion.

Another thing to remember is that there’s no such thing as a totally original 
idea. “Say it five times out loud … Every amazing creative thing you’ve ever 
seen, or idea you’ve ever heard can be broken down into smaller ideas that 
existed before,” writes the innovation expert Scott Berkun. A car is an engine 
plus wheels; the telephone is electricity plus sound. Great inventions happen 
when the right ingredients are already in the ether, waiting to be combined. 
That’s one reason for “multiple discoveries” – the phenomenon whereby more than 
one person came up with the idea for the telephone, the theory of evolution and 
the jet engine, within a short time of each other. So: think of any two current 
high-profile successes and combine them. What about Bananagrams but with selfie 
sticks? It’s a terrible, incoherent idea. Good! Now think of nine more.

And Linus Pauling’s advice – to have good ideas, have lots of ideas – doesn’t 
merely apply to sitting alone with a notebook. It’s a whole philosophy of life. 
Read lots of books and you’ll vastly increase the odds of encountering the one 
paragraph that makes everything click into place. Have lots of conversations 
and you’re much more likely to have the chance conversation that changes 
everything. “I believe that our planet is inhabited not only by animals and 
plants and bacteria and viruses, but also by ideas,” declares the author 
Elizabeth Gilbert, in her new book on creativity, Big Magic. It’s a slightly 
kooky way of making an excellent point: that you’ll go further by becoming more 
open to ideas, or the raw ingredients of ideas, than by trying to invent them 
from scratch. It’s an intoxicating thought: the next Mark Zuckerberg’s big idea 
is already out there, maybe in several pieces. You just have to find it, then 
do some self-assembly. We can discuss my commission later.
