
With the benefit of hindsight, what was the fashion story of Glastonbury 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury-2015>?

Name withheld, by email

Truly, at least a week is what is necessary in order to cogitate, consider 
and, indeed, collect one’s thoughts on this momentous matter. Are floral 
headpieces over? (Yes.) Is tie dye too Camden Market? (Yes.) (Incidentally, 
“too Camden Market” was one of the ultimate disses at my school back in the 
1990s and one I have found to be surprisingly useful and enduring.) Are 
hotpants ever a good idea in a field? (No.) But these are all general rules 
that can, really, be applied to any Glastonbury. Our business here today is 
whether there were any fashion trends at the festival that can be tied 
specifically to 2015 in the manner of the historic – nay, seminal – time in 
2004 whenSienna Miller wore a low-slung belt 
<http://www.glamourmagazine.co.uk/fashion/celebrity-fashion/2013/06/glastonbury-best-festival-fashion-sienna-miller-kate-moss-alexa-chung/viewgallery/998153>
, or when Kate Moss worewellingtons and a long jumper in 2005 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/kimberleydadds/a-history-of-kate-moss-at-glastonbury#.bcye2zokN>
. Oh, blessed are we who lived through such epoch shaping times!

Well, I am happy to say that the answer is yes, there was such a fashion 
statement at this summer’s festival and, for once, it had nothing to do with 
looking thin, nor was it dependent on being so. Boho is still a massive no-no 
but, proving that K-Mo, as no one has ever called her, is always ahead of 
everyone in fashion trends (and possibly EasyJet queues), it does have to do 
with wellingtons. This year, was all about the monogrammed wellington.

Now, I say “all about the monogrammed wellington”, but what makes it a fashion 
trend was its elitist nature. That is how fashion trends work, you see. When 
fashion writers deem something is a trend, they mean that three 
over-photographed women have worn it (fashion writer rule: two’s a coincidence, 
three’s a trend). Then when the public obey this edict and wear it for 
themselves, the trend is immediately damned as “overexposed” and the whole 
process starts again. Hey! No one ever said fashion was easy, people.

This summer, a well-known wellington company, which I won’t name (but they are 
welcome to buy advertising if they want publicity in this paper) gave 
wellingtons to certain celebrities monogrammed with their names on them in 
place of the company’s logo. Now, this being a music festival fashion trend, 
obviously only geniuses were included in this gifting: Noam Chomsky, Peter 
Higgs, Alice Munro … Wait, sorry, apparently I’m reading off the wrong list 
here. Actually, it was Poppy Delevingne, Suki Waterhouse andDaisy Lowe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/daisy-lowe>. Well, I was close there, but I 
maintain that dear Noam would look MARVELLOUS in a pair of a monogrammed 
wellingtons. Rumours reach me that Kim Kardashian also had a pair of 
monogrammed wellingtons but these are impossible to confirm because Kardashian 
was careful to be photographed only wearing her stilettos on the muddy Somerset 
fields.

Taking a small detour for a moment, can we all just stand up and applaud dear 
Kim for remaining so utterly true to herself – her inner Kardashian-ness – that 
she refused to alter her style a jot for Glastonbury? If you have never been to 
a fashion festival, especially one as over-scrutinised as Glastonbury, you have 
no idea how hard it is to resist the suction pull of festival fever. You arrive 
on the Friday in your normal clothes, utterly determined not to be a festival 
cliche and sneering at those who are. By Sunday, you’re rolling around in a 
field in denim hotpants, a faux vintage band T-shirt and a fringed poncho, 
talking to someone called “Bristol Jack” about how we’re all totally connected, 
man. Gwyneth Paltrow, Mick Jagger, even Lionel Richie – not people one can 
accuse of being low-maintenance, and yet all of them have bent their usual 
personal style to accommodate the whims of Glastonbury’s surprisingly 
persuasive fashion rules. But not our Kim. Even at four months pregnant, she 
insisted on sporting her now signature awkward-length lycra dress and strappy 
sandals while trudging through Somerset. Kardashian did confess on Twitter that 
she had sported wellingtons at some point in the day, but clearly this was such 
a painful event for her that she managed to – gasp! – stop taking selfies for 
the period of time in which she wore them so as to ensure absolutely 
no photographic evidence of this moment of shoe-style slumming. Say what you 
like about the Kardashians, but you gotta give them this: they are never 
off-brand.

Anyway, back to the monogrammed wellingtons. Monogramming has become quite a 
thing in fashion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/sep/05/monograms-clothes-touch-class> 
and, on the whole, I endorse it. Seeing as so much emphasis in fashion is 
placed on, strangely, looking the same as everyone else, there is something 
quite satisfying about individualising that handbag, or whatever, you spent a 
week’s wages on.

But these monogrammed wellingtons – oof. For a start, in the world of 
monogramming, there is a distinct difference between putting your initials 
(classy, subtle) on something and putting your name on it (a bit cutesy-wootsy, 
childish). But the real point here is that these boots were only available to 
celebrities, ie people whose names are perfectly well-known already and do not 
need their boots to introduce them. Unless, perhaps, the boot company was 
making an ironic comment that the term celebrity is now so debased that the 
public needs help ascertaining their actual names. I mean, could you identify 
Poppy Delevingne in a crowd if your life depended on it? I rest my case. If 
that was the modus operandi, well played, boot company. If, on the other hand, 
it was yet another way to celebrate celebrity narcissism, get in the sea, boot 
company.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings 
Place, 90 York  Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
