 My most vivid memory of Alan Beith, the cuddly, waddling Liberal Democrat MP 
is of meeting him on Victoria street in Westminster, London, sporting a 
broad-brimmed black fedora worthy of a Mafia don. It was during his 1988 
campaign against Paddy Ashdown for the party leadership. But the black fedora 
was not enough to overcome his often noted 'charisma bypass'. He lost, and 
became a loyal deputy to Mr Ashdown and later Charles Kennedy.
Mr Beith has long been the most reliable, worthy, realistic, well-informed and 
conscientious member of the Liberal Democrats' front bench. But he has also 
been its most conservative, puritanical northern Methodist representative: 
opposed to drink (aside from a daily glass of red wine); tobacco; abortion; 
fluoridation and closer collaboration with Labour, both old and new.

An advocate for Europe (including the ERM), Nato and Israel, he was also one 
of the first to call for parliamentary supervision of the intelligence services.

But Mr Beith is yet to realise his full potential thanks to the conflict 
between his natural liberalism and his puritanical streak. This held him back 
early in his career when the party was held in thrall by the hedonistic 
behaviour of Jeremy Thorpe, the 1970s Liberal leader.

Indeed, Mr Beith's almost Catholic aversion to abortion and embryo 
experimentation has put him in opposition to most Lib Dems: after all, David 
Steel, as party leader, launched the Abortion Act.

This puritanism helped him fight his way up from his roots as a local Liberal 
councillor of the north-east. And when Tory Lord Lampton resigned after he was 
caught by a Sunday tabloid with two callgirls, Mr Beith won the 1973 Berwick 
upon Tweed byelection by 57 votes. He has held the seat ever since.

It was a surprise change of occupation for the lecturer son of apolitical 
working-class Tory parents. But he soon made his mark in the Commons and within 
three years he succeeded Cyril Smith as chief whip.

He has long been a stout defender of fishermen in his constituency and an 
enlightened supporter of educational reform. His opposition to nuclear weapons 
led him to oppose Trident, while urging his colleagues to back Nato. In most 
crises, he has used his native shrewdness to advance solutions.

In 1984 he urged the sacking of both Arthur Scargill and coal board chief Ian 
MacGregor to end the miners' strike. He is also a longterm supporter of the 
inclusion into UK law of the European convention on human rights.

After the Alliance sagged in the 1987 election, Mr Beith was part of 
negotiations for the Liberal-SDP merger, insisting that the "voters prefer the 
respectability of marriage". His own marriage having ended with the death of 
his wife in April 1998, Mr Beith announced in November 2000 his intention to 
marry Democrat Baroness Maddock, the former MP for Christchurch.

Deputy leader of the party since 1992, and defeated in the October 2000 
contest for Speaker of the House of Commons, Mr Beith now looks set to continue 
in Parliament for one more term exactly as before - decent, often right, but 
just a bit dull.

Ask Aristotle about Alan Beith 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-334,00.html>
