
Growing up in an African tribe is no different from growing up in Chelsea. 
It's just about a sense of community. My tribe - the Dinka - values people and 
family. I wish I'd had more opportunity to understand their traditions before 
the civil war forced me to leave.

The African bush is hardcore. My hometown of Wau in southern Sudan had no 
running water or electricity, but when civil war broke out in 1983, we soon 
fled to relatives in a remote village. They thought we were spoilt.

Powdered okra is my comfort food. I never thought I'd crave it - I ate it 
every other day in Sudan - but I love the taste. Now I buy it from an organic 
store in Manhattan.

Michael Jackson really is the king of pop. When my friends talk about 
childhood, I've never heard of any cartoons or TV they remember. The only thing 
we share is Michael Jackson. That's how far his music travelled - to a remote 
village on the other side of the world. When the militias came to Wau, they 
would blast out 'Thriller' as they moved down the dirt streets.

There's no feeling sorry for yourself in a family of nine. I'm the seventh of 
nine children - it makes you understand it's not all about you.

Witch doctors don't work. I had serious psoriasis as a child - it's strange 
that I make my living off my looks after years of looking like a monster. My 
mum tried everything to cure it, even the local witch doctor. I looked at him 
and knew he was a charlatan, but bless mum for trying.

There's no phrase for 'I love you' in Dinka. The language is all about 
extremes which can be changed with gestures and expressions. You say 'I adore 
you' instead.

Wherever there's conflict, you get bad apples. The militias in the Sudanese 
civil war were young guys who didn't understand what they were fighting for or 
that they were killing innocent people. They just felt great because they had 
guns.

People mistake me for Naomi Campbell. They recognise my face, but the name 
Alek Wek <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alek-wek> isn't well known so they 
presume I'm Naomi. It's so stupid you have to think it's funny.

I don't mind cleaning toilets. But cleaning other people's toilets is bad. I 
had jobs from the age of 14, when I arrived in London as a refugee. Aged 17, 
I'd get up at 4am to work as a cleaner before school. It wasn't pleasant.

There's no such thing as a perfect model. It all comes down to whether you're 
right for a particular job. You have to understand going into fashion that no 
one will admire you for your abilities, they're not looking for a heart 
surgeon. You can't take it personally.

I've taught myself DIY. I can cut wood, put up shelves, plaster walls and do 
basic wiring.

I'm good at waiting. You sit around a lot at photo shoots and shows. I sketch 
or read. I've just finished Gandhi's autobiography and I like studying flower 
encyclopaedias.

Lancome makes the best cleanser. It works for most of the girls I know.

Politics is a dirty game. I work with charities to raise awareness of the war 
in Sudan and I believe people in the western world would do more if they truly 
knew what was going on. Leaders put forward different agendas.

Do something you believe in and you won't have any regrets. My father told me 
that was the way to be happy. And he was right.

· Alek Wek's autobiography Alek is published by Little, Brown on 8 November, 
priced £12.99
