
Alice on Joe

What were you hoping for? 
A nice dinner and the chance to meet someone different.

First impressions?
Friendly and chatty.

What did you talk about?
Our jobs, living in London, baking, pottery, museums, being valued for what 
you do.

Any awkward moments?
No, not really.

Good table manners?
Perfect.

Best thing about Joe?
His passion for his career and hobbies. It was great to meet someone who 
genuinely enjoyed pottery and learning to speak Japanese, and who wanted to 
talk about it without being patronising.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Of course.

Describe him in three words
Talkative, creative, engaging.

What do you think he made of you?
Hopefully that I was chatty and interested in what he had to say.

Did you go on somewhere?
No.

And… did you kiss?
Just a peck on the cheek.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I was happy with how it went, but it would have been nice to have gone for a 
drink somewhere else after.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
We exchanged numbers and said it would be nice to meet up again soon.

Joe on Alice

What were you hoping for?
A good meal in good company.

First impressions?
Articulate and well-spoken.

What did you talk about?
Our Christmases, drinking in parks as teens, Nazi art theft.

Any awkward moments?
The evening was awkward-moment-free.

Good table manners?
Very much so.

Best thing about Alice?
She was really engaging.

Would you introduce her to your friends? 
Definitely.

Describe her in three words
Intelligent, funny, interesting.

What do you think she made of you?
I have no idea.

Did you go on somewhere?
No, but things might have been different if it had been the weekend.

And… did you kiss?
Politely when saying hello and goodbye.

Related: Blind date: ‘A peck on the cheek for a first date is sufficient’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/02/blind-date-scott-meets-peter>

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I should have planned my route to the restaurant. I had to rush and was almost 
late.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
Yes.

• Joe and Alice ate at Haunt <http://hauntlondon.com/>, London N16.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>.

For a free three-day trial, go to soulmates.theguardian.com 
<http://soulmates.theguardian.com>.
