
I met you when I was 20. Your son, your baby boy, brought me home one summer 
to meet his family. You welcomed me in as one of your own and I adored you. I 
had never met anyone quite like you before. No hidden emotions, just 
spilling-over love for your family and an amazing passion and energy for life.

You were diagnosed with cancer the year after I met you. Your determination to 
beat it and your ability to embrace life, despite hideous treatment, astounded 
me. You lived so many years beyond your life expectancy and were so strong to 
the very end. You left us one October night, with your beloved husband and 
three children by your side. And then life fell apart. 

The previous day, we had a brief few minutes alone. Despite your fragility, 
you still managed to roar with laughter at Antiques Roadshow. Obviously knowing 
the end was in sight, you held me and talked of your baby boy. You told me you 
knew he would be OK because I would always be there to look after him.

We broke up three months later, and the weight of your words laid heavy on my 
heart for a long time. Perhaps my bond with you during your illness kept your 
boy and I together far longer than we should have been. Perhaps grief broke us 
apart. Or perhaps, when a loved one dies, being just 80% happy with your own 
life just isn’t good enough. 

Some people go through their whole life without meeting that influential 
person. I feel so lucky

When I did meet the amazing man who made me 100% happy, your darling boy was 
there at our wedding. He is now married to a wonderful woman who totally gets 
him and his crazy and endearing ways. They have a beautiful baby too. Your 
absence, I imagine, is felt more than ever.

Some people go through their whole life without meeting that influential 
person who will change the way they think about love and life. I feel so lucky 
to have loved and been loved by such a person. My time with you taught me not 
only to embrace life, but also how to be a wife and a mother.

Your marriage was rooted in honesty, openness and love. I have never seen a 
couple together for so long still so totally in love. Your dedication to 
leaving nothing unsaid often resulted in turbulent times, but I found the fact 
that nothing was bottled up, nothing held back, awe-inspiring. You taught me 
that, despite the volatile nature of saying all you feel about anything and 
everything at any given moment, love prevails. I think my ever patient husband 
would prefer a quieter life but he understands my need to spill my heart at all 
times.

And motherhood … I have two children now. Oh, if only you could meet them, B. 
You would squeal with delight on sight of them, squeeze them until they popped 
and stroke their curly heads. You would adore them and they would adore you, as 
I did. Your loving approach to mothering, which I only witnessed with your 
children over 20 but I know existed all their lives, I carry with me each day. 
Your influence is just as strong as my own wonderful mother and mother-in-law. 
You adored your children. They were the centre of your world, as mine are.

It is 13 years ago that you left us and I have carried you in my heart every 
day. Your influence lives on. Yellow flowers always remind me of you and, with 
daffodil season here once more, my home is bursting with them and my heart is 
full of memories of you. I still miss you, B, and always will.

Ax 
