
The days are getting longer and the sun is making occasional, rather shy 
attempts to show its face. While it may be a little pre-emptive to claim that 
summer is on its way, what is certain is that exam season is lurking just 
around the corner. This means that hundreds of otherwise sensible and 
well-balanced school leaders will soon develop temporary hysteria.

Staff will be encouraged, coerced, guilted and nudged into providing all 
manner of after-school booster sessions, Easter holiday classes, breakfast 
clubs, targeted interventions, catch-up sessions, take-out groups and Saturday 
school. Students will be dragged, bewildered, from their homes as yet another 
hour of their supposedly free time is spent in school, while parents will shake 
their heads in wonder as more letters with details of “compulsory revision 
sessions” pour through their letterboxes. It won’t be long before some bright 
spark suggests we open the school doors at 3am to get students doing some maths 
past papers.

The reasons for the temporary suspension of all sense of proportion are clear 
enough.Schools <http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> are under 
tremendous pressure to deliver results. Ofsted demands it, their reputation 
rests on it and, lest we forget in these days of performance-related pay, 
teachers’ wallets need it too. The result is an almost palpable sense of panic 
and a prevailing mood that Something Must Be Done. All it takes is the rumour 
that the school down the road is laying on classes every evening and the 
students’ fate is sealed.

I was relieved to hear John Tomsett 
<https://twitter.com/johntomsett?lang=en-gb>, headteacher of Huntington School 
in York, say thathe has scrapped revision sessions 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/headteacher-scraps-mad-year-11-revision-classes-to-protect-pupil-mental-health/>
 at his school. He argued that such sessions were being offered so that staff 
could “cover their backsides” if results were poor. He said: “I’m not going to 
get results at the cost of the mental health of my staff and pupils.”


The year we did most intervention was the year the results dropped the most.

It goes without saying that all of us want students to do well. I’d go 
further, and say the vast majority of us go above and beyond to help students 
exceed their own expectations. We do this every day, in our normal timetabled 
lessons and the extra hoo-ha at this time of year is actually detrimental to 
that.


For a start, the message it communicates to students is that last-minute 
cramming is a good way of studying. More than that, it unsettles them: children 
can sense fear and, as the requests for them to come to out-of-hours lessons 
increase in frequency and urgency, there can be no mistaking the clammy palms 
of their authors.

I have sat in school at 9am on a Saturday morning, past papers at the ready, 
as sullen children traipse in. Many vote with their feet and stay away, and who 
can blame them? They’ve already done a full working week plus homework. As I 
look into their eyes I can tell we are all thinking the same thing: their time 
would be better spent going over the material I taught perfectly well the first 
time round by themselves. I would be better off planning engaging lessons for 
my somewhat neglected non-exam classes.

The irony, of course, is that these same school leaders proclaim the 
importance of developing students’ independent work. They just don’t believe it 
enough to actually leave them to revise independently. So a culture of 
dependence is perpetuated and students arrive at the next stage of their 
education ill-prepared for its demands.

But above all this is a point so blasphemous, so taboo, that it dare not be 
spoken in staffrooms or school corridors: all these extra sessions don’t seem 
to work. It’s the kind of point that would fall into a pool of silence, as if 
one had just said they ritually sacrificed goats in their spare time. The 
additional teaching assuages leadership guilt, certainly, and gives the feeling 
that we have put something in place. But the year we did most intervention was 
the year our results dropped the most.

My hypothesis would be that staff were stretched so thin that they ended up 
delivering more mediocre lessons rather than fewer really good ones. Plus 
students are just exhausted: even the keen ones can’t keep up that level of 
intensity throughout the build up to and actual exam season. They peak too soon 
and arrive at their first exam demoralised, overloaded and under-rested.

I have seen students lining up outside the year 11 pastoral office, ashen 
faced and ravaged by stress – and that’s just for their mocks. For sure the 
system is partly at fault here: students these days are expected to take a 
colossal number of exams all in one sitting. But as their school, and even more 
so as we act in loco parentis, surely we must do everything we can to alleviate 
and minimise pressure.

John Tomsett’s voice is one of reason and sanity in a system that is jittery 
beyond measure. My hope is that others will follow his lead. Let’s all take a 
more calm and rational approach this year. Let’s support our students, not 
overload them. Let’s not only teach them subject content, let’s model a healthy 
approach to pressure too. Let’s take a long-term view, not grapple for a 
short-term sticking plaster. Let’s teach them the value of sustained hard work 
rather than facilitating cramming. And let’s not allow any sun we do get this 
summer go to our heads.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
