
The dilemma Our son and only child died suddenly and unexpectedly at 19 months 
old this time last year. We feel blessed and grateful for the time we had while 
he was with us, but since we lost him we have suffered no shortage of difficult 
interactions. In the early days people were very careful around us. Now that 
sensitivity has waned. Some people now ignore us when we pass in the street, 
while others tell us that happiness is an attitude. We have also struggled with 
happy life events, for example birth announcements and weddings. How much can 
we expect from others around us? And what might be a reasonable or socially 
acceptable response to some of the silly things we are told?

Mariella replies Your loss terrifies me. It’s almost impossible to imagine the 
pain you have endured and what courage it has taken to focus on the gift of 
your son’s short life rather than its cruel brevity. Only a year later your 
emotional wounds must still feel exposed and raw. The fact that you’re 
vulnerable to interaction in a world where people are going about their 
business blissfully immune to your experience of extreme tragedy is not 
surprising.

Without having undergone your unthinkable trauma, with no faith in an 
afterlife and being untrained in grief counselling, I’m under-equipped to 
comfort you. The death of my father so long ago, and friends more recently, 
doesn’t come close to helping me comprehend the loss you have endured. I 
presume you’ve turned to professionals, accepting that you deserve and need 
support in negotiating your pain. Grief counselling can be just as helpful in 
negotiating day-to-day trials as extreme trauma (Cruse, 0844 477 9400,
cruse.org.uk <http://www.cruse.org.uk/>).

What feels normal and what is normal can easily be confused when your world is 
shaken to its core. As a non-expert I’ll doubtless fall into the category of 
the many well-meaning characters who have brushed past you these past 12 months 
and be pathetically illiterate when it comes to talking about death. Most of us 
simply can’t bear to engage in any functional way with the black hole into 
which we are all inevitably headed. Confronted with the fragility of life and 
the nightmare of loss, we are conflicted. We are eager to offer comfort, afraid 
of stepping too close in case we invite similar devastation and yet macabrely 
compelled by proximity to the limits of human endurance.

Losing a child must leave you feeling that you are trapped in a bubble, going 
through the motions of “normal” living while feeling utterly disconnected 
inside your skin. I imagine you feel you’re in a place where nobody can 
properly reach you, and the rare people who do break through, though 
well-intentioned, seem to blunder about saying the clumsiest things.

Death remains inconceivable to most of us until we encounter it in close 
proximity. Thankfully you’re not asking me to feel or interpret your pain – 
simply to offer my opinion on how to interact in the world without it serving 
you endless further blows. Few of us are capable of discussing death in any 
meaningful way unless professionally trained. Instead we try to slip past, 
unobtrusive, offering platitudes and hoping such terrible, unimaginable and 
conclusive separation from those we love can be kept at bay by maintaining our 
ignorance.

Although I’ve lost people in my life, the greatest understanding I’ve gleaned 
about coping with that consuming empty space has come from reading, where the 
imagination and experience of some great writers has shone a torch into this 
dark corner.Julian Barnes’s searingly angry Levels of Life 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sense-of-an-ending-3.html>, about his 
feelings after the death of his wife, immediately springs to mind. I think 
you’d find empathy there. What such books teach those of us yet to experience 
similar tragedy is that everyone’s grief is unique and only luck helps us 
strike the right note in talking with the bereaved, and anything we say or do 
is as likely to appear ill judged and even cruel as it is to comfort.

I say all this to make the case for those around you whose failure to express 
their sympathy and inability to read your state of mind is causing you further 
grief. Try not to judge those who fail to find the right words. They may lack 
the correct vocabulary and avoid you out of fear of saying the wrong thing, but 
both can obscure their good intentions. Perhaps as your loss inevitably dims 
and daily life becomes a distraction rather than an endurance, your fellow 
humans will regain your favour and be bathed in a more positive light. We both 
know that there is no miracle to undo what has been done, and you will never be 
the same as you were before he passed away (and perhaps never want to be), but 
time will eventually assuage your pain. Like your little boy, you two have only 
this one life, long or short, happy or tragic and everything in between.

Judging others may be less restorative for you than evaluating why they 
trigger these emotions. Surely the best thing to do is ignore the clumsiness of 
others and cut short unhelpful exchanges. You have a total right to set the 
boundaries of such interactions. And then try to be generous to yourself and 
your partner – your form of grieving may be entirely subjective, but your pain 
is shared.

Give each other permission to float on the arbitrary tides of grief until one 
day you land on solid ground and are able to look forward and engage in the 
wider world while forever remembering and celebrating the brief tenure of your 
lost boy.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
