
I began a relationship with a girl, through correspondence on social media, 
for almost a month before we had a first date. Before we even met, I felt a 
strong bond and lots of shared values and the sort of exciting frisson that can 
only be felt if you find a deep emotional connection simply through words. On 
our first date we hit it off and talked for hours and hours, we made love that 
first night. I could not have been happier, and our first few months were 
simply wonderful and without hitch.

Then things began to unravel. She went through my phone and found a message to 
my previous girlfriend, which said I hoped we could remain friends. She became 
anxious and convinced I still had feelings for her predecessor. This anxiety 
never went away and I was constantly interrogated about my feelings towards my 
ex. Her moods would be intense and unyielding, I began to feel trapped in a 
situation of dark, depressing fear and mistrust. No matter what I said, she was 
convinced I still wanted to be with my previous girlfriend.

This anxiety continued for several months and during our arguments she 
attempted suicide more than once.

We tried mediation and she tried talking therapy, which she stopped after 
three visits. This cycle continued, until she hacked my email and Facebook 
accounts. She would use the content of emails to all my ex-girlfriends in 
arguments about why she didn’t trust me any more. I changed all my passwords.

We decided to break up because I could no longer handle her anxiety and fear. 
She did not take this well and found a way to hack into my accounts again. She 
emailed all of my friends and family with long, rambling emails about why I 
could not be trusted. She began threatening to hack my accounts again and would 
send me dozens of emails each day, making threats: to plant drugs in my 
apartment, call the police and so on.

She even set up a fake Tinder account and corresponded with me again, as I was 
trying to start over. She then wrote about how she was reading all my private 
messages to friends and family. One evening, I had nearly three dozen missed 
calls from her, followed with threats to reveal something I was hiding – I 
don’t know what it is to this day – unless I answered.

Thankfully, friends and family rallied round, and I have felt supported and 
trusted. But her behaviour had a really powerful effect on me and I began to 
fear another emailed threat. I felt genuinely harassed. At time of writing, I 
have had no contact from her for the last few days. What could I have done to 
avoid this situation in the first place?

It’s sensitive of you to ask what you could have done to avoid this in the 
first place, but it’s important to realise that your ex’s behaviour is entirely 
her responsibility. You didn’t cause it and it wasn’t your fault. Her behaviour 
was highly controlling and abusive (imagine if the gender roles were reversed. 
I think you’ll see more clearly how abusive this situation was). I’m glad you 
had friends and family who rallied.

I also spoke to a solicitor who specialises in criminal law. She advised that 
your ex has commited criminal offences.

What I can try and help you with is perhaps looking at relationships in 
general and the potential pitfalls of meeting someone online (great though it 
can also be) where you can create a fantasy around them before you meet, which 
may see you missing out on valuable cues to their personality.

I want to stress that this was not your fault – and even if you meet someone 
in real life things can go wrong.

I contacted psychotherapist Caroline Kendal (bacp.co.uk 
<http://www.bacp.co.uk/>), who wondered “why you were writing to someone for a 
month before meeting them. The danger of doing this is that you create a 
fantasy idea of that person before meeting them – you are basically investing 
in a fantasy relationship.”

While this can be enormous fun – and intoxicating as you have found – it isn’t 
realistic, and because you lay a tracing-paper idea of your ideal partner over 
the person, when you do finally meet, it can take longer to see them for who 
they really are.

“Look at what stopped you meeting her sooner,” advises Kendal. “Next time, 
keep it to one or two emails, a phone call, then meet her [in a public place 
etc].”

I think that, if there is a next time, you will spot the signs faster and be 
able to act quicker.

I also spoke to Joy Merriam, a solicitor who specialises in criminal law. She 
advised that your ex has commited criminal offences, of harassment, against the 
Protection of Harrassment Act 2003 and by cyber-stalking you (section 127 of 
the Communications Act 2003).

If she reappears, you could go to the police (you could do that anyway but if 
she has now left you alone it may be best to let sleeping dogs lie).

She would probably be given a warning, and if she ignored that she would be 
charged and given a restraining order which, if she contravened, could see her 
sent to prison. So you do have legal rights.

What your ex did was not just annoying, it was criminal.

Your problems solved

Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
