
Eddie O’Hara, the former Labour MP for Knowsley South, who has died aged 78, 
had a lifelong passion for Greek scholarship and culture and was a fervent 
enthusiast for the long-running campaign for the reunification of theParthenon 
marbles <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/parthenon-marbles>.

An irony of his years of dedication he gave to this cause was his good fortune 
to be alive to pursue it, as he had been personally identified as a military 
target when doing national service with the British Army in Cyprus in the late 
1950s. A keen sportsman and athlete, he took a daily run outside the army camp, 
always along the same route in the Cypriot countryside, a routine that was 
observed by theEoka 
<http://cyprus-mail.com/2015/04/01/the-eoka-struggle-what-was-it-all-for/> 
terrorists who were fighting to free their island from what was termed “the 
British yoke” and who mined his path. Had the booby-trap not been discovered in 
time, the Greek Cypriots would have been denied the subsequent support O’Hara 
demonstrated as one of the most tireless and articulate advocates of their 
political interests.

The death in 1994 of the Greek singer and politician Melina Mercouri 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-melina-mercouri-1427550.html>
, who was strongly identified with the controversy about restoring to Athens 
what were then known as the Elgin marbles, prompted an early day motion tabled 
by O’Hara in the House of Commons, urging the case for reunification. It was 
the first of nine such attempts he made during his two decades as an MP to 
secure publicity and all-party political pressure for the campaign. He 
organised and attended countless meetings in the UK and Greece, and won 
considerable personal respect from Greek government officials and 
archaeologists. In 2005 he became chairman of theMarbles Reunited 
<http://www.marblesreunited.org.uk/> campaign and in 2010 was made chairman of 
what is now called theBritish Committee for the Reunification of the Parthenon 
Marbles <http://www.parthenonuk.com/>.

He had learned his love for the classics at Liverpool 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> Collegiate school from where he won a 
place at Magdalen College, Oxford. Of his schooldays he later said: “I was a 
little lad from docklands who went to a high pressured academic establishment 
and of course I was bullied.” But he overcame this by being good at football 
and helping other children with their homework.

He was born and brought up in Bootle, Merseyside, the son of Robert and Clara 
(nee Davies). His father was a carter and the family home was a terraced house 
beside the dray yard with wagons and shire horses stabled next door. This 
heritage remained important to him throughout his life and he stayed true to 
his Liverpool roots. He was a local school governor, a member of the management 
board of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Society and a loyal supporter of 
Liverpool FC.

He graduated in 1962 and began his career teaching Latin and Greek for three 
years at the Perse school, Cambridge, and then atBirkenhead school 
<http://www.birkenheadschool.co.uk/> (1966-70). He was a fluent Greek speaker 
and entranced his pupils by translating Beatles lyrics into Latin. He secured a 
Postgraduate Certificate in Education (PGCE) in 1966 and an advanced Diploma of 
Education from the University of London in 1970. The next 20 years were spent 
as a lecturer in his native city at CF Mott College of Education, the City of 
Liverpool College of Higher Education and Liverpool Polytechnic (now Liverpool 
John Moores University).

During this time he became involved in local politics as a member of Knowsley 
borough council from 1975 until his victory at the 1990 byelection when he 
entered the Commons. Knowsley South was considered one of the safest 
parliamentary seats in the country but was abolished after boundary changes in 
2010 when George Howarth, the former MP for Knowsley North, was chosen as 
Labour’s candidate for the new seat of Knowsley. In the Commons, O’Hara was a 
diligent MP and a member of a wide range of parliamentary groups reflecting the 
variety of his interests and enthusiasms.

He was a delegate to the Western European Union and the Council of Europe and 
a member of the Speaker’s Panel of Chairs. He presided over committee debates 
on several finance bills and the legislation to ban hunting; he was strongly in 
favour of the ban. He was also an opponent of whaling, breeding birds to shoot, 
the culling of badgers and trimming the beaks of egg-laying hens.

In 1962 O’Hara married Lillian Hopkins and they had three children, Terence, 
Barry and Helen. They separated amicably in 1998 and after Lillian’s death, he 
married Margaret Gilbert (nee Gartside) in 2014. She survives him, as do his 
children and four grandchildren.

A diagnosis of pulmonary fibrosis five years ago restricted some of his 
activities but did not prevent him from travelling toGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> whenever possible. He described 
himself as “an unreconstructed classicist” and was disappointed but not 
surprised by the last Labour government’s failure to act on the marbles 
question. He reflected: “Tony Blair had many strengths and many interests, but 
I don’t think the marbles was one of them.”

• Edward O’Hara, politician and campaigner, born 1 October 1937; died 28 May 
2016
