
Bruce Jenner has confirmed that she identifies as a woman, ending years of 
rumour and speculation that shone an uncomfortable light on the transgender 
community.


The reality TV star and former Olympic athlete told Diane Sawyer in a highly 
anticipatedABC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/abc> interview broadcast on 
Friday night that she now regarded herself as female.

“For all intents and purposes I’m a woman,” she said, loosening her hair from 
a ponytail.

Related: Bruce Jenner throws focus on America’s ‘new civil rights frontier’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/25/bruce-jenner-kardashians-transgender-interview-civil-rights>

Jenner referred to herself mostly in the third person and with the male 
pronoun but said she was embracing femininity after a lifelong struggle with 
gender identity.

“I look at it this way – Bruce always telling a lie. He’s lived a lie his 
whole life about who he is. And I can’t do that any longer. My brain is much 
more female than it is male. It’s hard for people to understand that, but 
that’s what my soul is.”

Wearing a blue shirt and black trousers, Jenner said she began cross-dressing 
aged about either or nine, clandestinely trying on dresses from his mother’s 
and sisters’ closets. “At the time I didn’t know why I was doing it besides it 
just made me feel good.”

The habit continued into adulthood while travelling as a motivational speaker. 
“I’d literally go up into the hotel room, change [into women’s] clothes, and 
walk around.”

The athlete, who won a decathlon gold medal in the 1976 Olympics before 
finding fame as a member of the Kardashian clan, said people did not know her 
true self.

“They see you as this macho male, but my heart and my soul and everything that 
I do in life – it is part of me. That female side is part of me. That’s who I 
am.”

Millions were expected to tune in to the two-hour 20/20 special, which 
followed a months-long tabloid frenzy over Jenner’s changing appearance.

The broadcast 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/bruce-jenner-im-woman/story?id=30570350> 
was an edited version of several interviews conducted in February. ABC kept a 
tight lid on the material and released only a few enigmatic clips in advance to 
build suspense.

Jenner was reportedly not paid for the interview 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/gossip/confidential/bruce-jenner-won-profit-crossover-q-diane-sawyer-article-1.2103474>
.

In one of the interview’s few lighter moments she laughed off suggestions that 
the transition was a stunt to promote Keeping up with the Kardashians. “Yeah 
we’re doing this for publicity. Yeah right.”

However, going public, and having the show as a platform, could aid 
understanding of transgender people, Jenner said. “What I’m doing is going to 
do some good. And we’re going to change the world.”

Jenner said Laverne Cox, a transgender actor on the TV drama Orange is the New 
Black, had advised her about transitioning in public. “I would like to work 
with this community to get this message out. They know a lot more than I know … 
I am not a spokesman for the community.”

The Olympian said she underwent cosmetic facial surgeries over the years and 
took the female hormone estrogen for five years in the late 1980s, then resumed 
taking the hormones for the past year and a half.

Further surgery or treatment was an area of uncertainty. “As of now I have all 
the male parts and all that kind of stuff, so in a lot of ways we’re different, 
OK?” Jenner told Sawyer. “But we still identify as female. And that’s very hard 
for Bruce Jenner to say. Because why? I don’t want to disappoint people.”

The former Olympian sounded upbeat but uncertain about the future. “I hope I’m 
going to be OK. I feel that I’m going to be OK. 2015 is going to be quite a 
ride. Quite a ride.”

Earlier on Friday Jenner’s step-daughter, Kim Kardashian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian>, said the family would 
watch the broadcast together. Jenner’s third wife, Kris Kardashian, made no 
immediate comment.

Jenner has six biological children and four stepchildren through marriage to 
Kris. The couple split last year.

Jenner’s 17-year-old daughter Kylie expressed support on Instagram, sharing a 
throwback black and white photo of her father wearing denim shorts and a 
cut-off shirt, signing it #love. Jenner’s second wife, Linda Thompson, also 
took to Instagram in praise.

The transgender community expressed mixed feelings in advance of the broadcast 
– some hoping for a milestone, others fearing media exploitation.

Sarah Kate Ellis, the head of GLAAD, issued a statement welcoming the 
interview, saying it would impact and inspire countless people. “Today millions 
of people learned that someone they know is transgender.”

Jenner’s evolving appearance has fuelled intrusive and copious tabloid 
coverage in recent months. Paparazzi with telephoto lenses have staked out 
Jenner’s movements and his home in Malibu, prompting Los Angeles County 
sheriff’s deputies to visit the house earlier this week.

The media circus dented growing acceptance of transgender people 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/tv/la-et-st-critics-notebook-bruce-jenner-interview-20150423-column.html>
, lamented the Los Angeles Times television critic, Mary McNamara. “After all 
the strides made by the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community in 
recent years, we’re back to gawking at what appears to be the sight of someone 
we consider a man wearing a dress.” She said the media’s obsession with Jenner 
had gone from “stalkerish to zoological”.

The New York-born Olympian’s triumph at the Montreal Olympics led to pin-up 
celebrity status, a career as a television actor and motivational speaker, and 
then renewed fame as a de facto Kardashian.

Jenner said she could no longer “pull the curtains” on her identity. “I’ve 
built a nice little life, I just can’t – again, Bruce lives a lie. She is not a 
lie.”

Jenner continued: “If I die, which, I could be diagnosed next week with cancer 
– and boom, you’re gone. I would be so mad at myself that I didn’t explore that 
side of me, you know? And I don’t want that to happen.”
