
A reader Facebooked me the other day to ask my advice about how much fluid to 
give her toddler without spoiling her appetite. Seriously! As if I were a 
useful parenting resource, instead of a total unalloyed idiot, wandering about 
with my arms outstretched, like Frankenstein's monster without the ill will. 
But just as I was about to reply, saying, "Love, you have me all wrong, I am 
like Frankenstein's monster, etc etc," I realised that I might not know 
anything, but I definitely have some very strong views.

On that matter in particular, I actually don't have an opinion. I've never had 
a problem getting T to eat and, on days when he doesn't eat much, I refer back 
to a section in a book by Annabel Karmel where it says, "Sometimes toddlers 
like to run about, and eat practically nothing."

I am the kind of layperson whom experts despise. When they say something that 
tessellates with my fundamental urge to not worry, I can quote them in my 
sleep. When the same expert says something that goes against my instincts - 
such as sugar is bad - I give it no credence; it's as if it came not just from 
another expert, but from another planet. Karmel is full of notes on how rusks 
are packed with sugar, unless you make them yourself, for which purpose she 
provides a recipe, from which she has excised all sugar. Hers are disgusting. I 
don't think they are even as tasty as horse droppings.

I cannot stand this crusade; I know people whose children had their first 
biscuit aged two, who eat carob "chocolate" sweetened with honey, who think 
raisins are a special treat. I know people who actually call raisins 
baby-crack, to underline their impossibly delicious, contraband nature. Sodding 
raisins; dried grapes; not even yoghurt-coated. It is absurd. All the stuff 
about mood crashes is absurd.

The only children with that more-more-more, siege mentality, who go all 
psychotic when the supply line dries up, are the ones with wholemeal parents 
who treat a Twix like the devil on a stick. All the stuff about teeth can be 
solved by, like, cleaning their teeth. All the stuff about obesity - come on, 
you can see if they're fat by the simple precaution of looking at them. Why do 
people feed their children rice cakes? Incidentally, they are only given 
flavours to create the fiction that they have a taste - when you buy the orange 
ones, you collude in a dishonesty that lurks at the heart of society. It's a 
diet food! You have this human who expends probably as many calories as there 
are in a fry-up just working out how to walk, and then you feed them a 
foodstuff with 22 calories per serving! It's like feeding polystyrene to a rat 
and then complaining that it seems listless.

I especially can't stand people who eat relatively normally, but feed their 
children broccoli and tofu, as if the kids are these tiny chambers of purity 
and while we may have been corrupted, that's no reason they should be. It's 
like calling your child Isambard when your own name is Steve. At least 
experiment with these decisions yourself, first, for the love of God and 
sausage rolls.

I was nearly on board with the anti-salt message - small babies can't process 
a lot of salt. That is fair. They have tiny kidneys. I wouldn't give a baby a 
martini. But all the elaborate neurosis, the hyper-caution - there's actually a 
bit on the NHS website that says, "Don't give food that isn't specifically for 
babies, as it's often too high in salt." It's maddening! Someone's meant to 
invent baby-cheese now? This is where those children come from who'll only eat 
pasta and toast. It's not even their fault. It's just a fog of silliness, 
stringent rules, unattainable models of perfection, instead of children eating 
nice food because that's what everyone else is eating, apart from the animals 
who have to eat pellets. I bet it is only a matter of time before this 
orthodoxy extends to feeding children pellets; so easy to monitor, and 
dispense; so perfectly lacking in variety. Everybody knows that if they have 
too much variety as children, they might seek variety as adults, and that, my 
friends, is how you end up in Burger King.

One correction to make, then - I turn out to be Frankenstein's monster with 
the ill will. But towards T's nutritional intake, I am all goodwill. I am milk 
and honey. But for preference, I am Haribos and fizzy pop.
