
Online sports coverage that "fizzes like a Shane Warne leg-break" and 
innovation in online publishing saw Guardian Unlimited, the website of the 
Guardian newspaper, win two awards at theAssociation of Online Publishers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/aop> Awards.

The website picked up the editorial team 2005 consumer award for its sporting 
websitestheguardian.com/football <https://www.theguardian.com/football> and 
theguardian.com/sport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sport> and the online 
publisher 2005 consumer award.

The judges praised the publisher's "innovation and ability to develop new 
revenue streams" and the sport's team's razor sharp journalism.

"The Guardian Unlimited football and sport team display significant leadership 
in the sports sector, setting the benchmark for quality and bringing a strong 
editorial stance and personality to their writing, with real evidence of team 
work," the judges said.

"In a world of identikit sports sites offering a flabby diet of wire stories 
or regurgitated newspaper copy, Guardian Unlimited's five-strong sports team 
has earned a global reputation for combining razor-sharp journalism with a wit 
that fizzes like a Shane Warne leg-break.

"The team's work seeks to probe, tease and inform and has resulted in the 
channel traffic soaring from 10.1m page impressions in August 2004, to 17.6m in 
July 2005.

Guardian Unlimited won the publisher of the year award because of its clear 
vision and variety of business models.

"Guardian Unlimited has demonstrated remarkable growth in user metrics, as 
well as continued strong innovation and the development of new revenue streams. 
The Guardian really embraced the web from the word 'Go', and continues to set 
precedents."

"As the market-leading UK newspaper website the Guardian has delivered 
sustained editorial excellence and innovation in 2005, including the launch of 
blogs in a number of key areas; a beta text of its own branded RSS reader; the 
introduction of new advertising formats and tactical expansion in the mobile 
space.

"This has been matched with significant audience and revenue growth, achieving 
129m page impressions from 11m users in July 2005 (a 32 per cent increase 
year-on-year), while total revenue for the year increased by 46 per cent.

The awards were held on Friday at the London Hilton, Park Lane.

Emap won three awards for its radio and music websites and its automotive 
sales team, while the BBC and Reed Business Information each collected two 
awards. The UK Association of Online Publishers is an industry body 
representing online publishing companies including Associated New Media, BBC, 
BSkyB, Capital Radio Group, Channel 4 and IPC Media, among others.
