
Q My doctor says I should get a rucksack to carry all my heavy stuff to work, 
as apparently my designer bag is a danger to my shoulders. Can you help me find 
a stylish one?

Melissa

A Your doctor is right, and I've had to abandon my big designer bag for fear 
of injury. A rucksack is a good idea in theory, but it's not the most 
attractive accessory, and shoulder straps don't work well with a bosom. So meet 
your doctor halfway: find one large enough to hold your handbag and use it for 
the journey to work. You then have your designer bag with you during the day 
for use in and out of the office. Clare Tough has a fun and brightly coloured 
rucksack inspired by the Manhattan skyline. Raf Simons's spring collection was 
inspired by the backpacker, and all the models at his show accessorised with 
colour-coordinated rucksacks. Otherwise, American Apparel's 'school bag canvas' 
sack comes in every colour imaginable (£26 atamericanapparel.net 
<http://www.americanapparel.net>) while North Face's Daypack (northface.com 
<http://www.northface.com>) is very understated and has a padded back panel. Go 
for the fashion editors' favourite colour - black and ultra slick.

QI'm just itching to buy a dress from the spring/summer 2008 collections. Can 
you advise me on a good look for the new season?

Sarah

A This new season is all about bright colours and pretty, delicate, girlie 
clothes. You could still find a bold-coloured dress in the sales, as the winter 
ranges had some great hues. But if you're really set on a summer dress pick 
something that can be styled in different ways - a dress that works with 
cardigans and boots during the coming cold months. But I wouldn't plump for 
chiffon right now, even though it's an important fabric this season. Look at 
the cooler, young designers' collections, such as Marc by Marc Jacobs and 
Luella. Floral is another incoming trend - I loved the tiny, floral-print dress 
in the new Luella collection. Wear it with lace-up boots for spring. Another 
floral favourite of mine is New Zealand designer Karen Walker's pretty dresses. 
I am sure one of these will cure your 'itch'.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
