
Within every class of vehicle the sales battle is fought under a distinctive 
set of rules. Some fight purely on price, others over fuel efficiency. It might 
be spaciousness, or luxury, or power for others – frequently it’s a combination 
of the above and more. Electric cars must compete on all of the same points, 
while offering zero emissions at the exhaust pipe and lower running costs – 
offering customers everything they enjoy about their car now, and more.

Renault’s contender, the ZOE, offers safety, space, and everyday usability, as 
well as a driving experience matching or exceeding that of vehicles in the 
conventional supermini class, along with super-low running and maintenance 
costs.


Related: Five myths about electric cars busted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/2016/may/19/five-myths-about-electric-cars-busted>

That electric cars are more expensive than internal combustion is a matter of 
industrial history: carmakers have spent a century cost-cutting conventional 
car parts. Electric cars, conversely, are built from a range of new 
technologies: from battery packs to power electronics, everything is still in 
its infancy, and performance, rather than price, drives design.


For Renault, offering the ZOE with a four-year warranty and at a price-point 
equivalent to a diesel competitor is impressive. More impressive still is the 
offering of a truly impressive range and several world-first technologies.

About that range. Ignore it. The New European Driving Cycle is a good tool for 
comparison tests, but the standardised simulation carried out under lab 
conditions is frequently criticised for bearing little similarity to real-world 
driving. Renault suggests a rather more realistic estimated range* of 106-miles 
in summer, dropping to 71 miles in deep winter, although there’s also an “eco” 
button that allows the ZOE to eke-out a little more range by limiting 
acceleration, decreasing top speed and turning down the air-con.


For most motorists, however, vehicle range shouldn’t be a major issue. The 
most recent census by the Office of National Statistics informs us most regular 
trips fall well within ZOE’s range: the daily repeat business of the commute to 
work (averaging nine miles in 2011); the school run; and shopping trips are 
where electric cars excel. It makes sense to carry 45kg of sloshing petrol 
because a daily trip to the filling station would be annoying; it doesn’t make 
sense to add on another slab of batteries when recharging is a simple matter of 
remembering to plug in when you get home.

ZOE can be charged directly from a standard three-pin socket – but that can 
take quite a while. The preferred option is the home wall box, supplied and 
fitted by Chargemaster for Renault’s retail customers, which brings the full 
charge time down to three-to-four hours. Out on the road, you could opt for one 
of Britain’s 9,000 charging points suitable for the ZOE, more than 200 of which 
are higher-powered chargers that drop charge times further, with an 80% charge 
completed in 30-60 minutes.

Inside the ZOE, an embedded built-in R-Link tablet offers a TomTom satnav, 
which allows drivers to plot the most energy-efficient routes and locates 
nearby charging points. It’s also capable of carrying out a range of tablet 
functions including access to email and Twitter. It can even give you feedback 
on your driving style after each journey, if you’re the sort of person who 
appreciates that kind of thing.

There are now more than 4,200 ZOEs registered in the UK. The ZOE and cars like 
it are gaining in popularity. Data from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and 
Traders show sales of pure electric cars rose by 40% in 2015, as the market for 
new cars grew by 6% in the same year. The remaining question for an electric 
future is the issue of longevity. Conventional cars target lifecycles of 15 
years or 150,000 miles but, as everyone with a phone or a laptop knows, 
lithium-ion batteries have a tendency to degrade. This is where Renault changed 
the conventional car offering. Anyone worried about being stuck with an 
electric vehicle 100,000 miles hence can take the option of buying the car but 
hiring the battery pack. For a monthly fee, based on expected mileage, Renault 
will simply rent you the battery pack and replace it should its capacity fall 
below 75% of the original figure.

For all the undoubted innovation, perhaps Renault’s real technological 
achievement is this: managing to bring all this design and technology into a 
lower price bracket, and bringing the electric dream to the mass market.


*All ranges are based on standard driving styles and weather conditions
