
Neil Fox will return to the radio for the first time since he was cleared of 
sex abuse charges as one of the launch DJs of a new London station, ThamesRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio>.


The former Magic presenter will be reunited with his one-time Capital 
colleague, Pat Sharp, on the digital station which will look to recreate the 
80s and 90s heyday of London commercial radio.

Fox, the former Pop Idol judge better known to many listeners as Dr Fox, faced 
a string of indecent and sexual assault allegations dating back to the 1980s. 
He was cleared of all charges last December.

Related: DJ Neil Fox cleared of sexually assaulting young women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/14/radio-dj-neil-fox-cleared-sexual-abuse>

Fox said: “I can’t wait to get back on air in the greatest city on earth.

“Playing London’s all-time favourite songs and being able to talk about 
everything that’s happening in the place in which I live, and love, as well as 
being reunited with some great friends and colleagues from the past, is going 
to be an absolute blast.

“This is the station I have wanted to listen to for years, but it simply 
didn’t exist. Until now.”

Fox will host a Saturday morning programme on the new station. Sharp will 
present a Sunday morning love-songs show, up against Radio 2’s Steve Wright, 
and bring back his “top 10 at 10” weekday feature familiar to Capital listeners 
of a certain age.

Sharp said: “For me, being on air once more at a station that will live and 
breathe London, could actually cap it all. Patman is getting set to play on the 
Thames again.”

The new station, which will be available on digital audio broadcasting (DAB) 
radio in London and online from 26 June, will be run by commercial radio group, 
Nation Broadcasting.

Nation Broadcasting founder Jason Bryant said: “We want to create the energy 
and excitement of what radio was back then in the 80s and 90s, and put it in a 
modern setting.

“As London’s existing music stations have moved to become UK-wide services, we 
see an opportunity to introduce a truly London-focused, great music and 
personality-driven radio service to the world’s greatest capital city.

“We’re so excited to bring Neil and Pat back to London’s airwaves, and we look 
forward to welcoming further big names to Thames in the coming months.”

The station’s launch is being overseen by former Smooth Radio programme 
director Chris Stevens.

“Playing London’s greatest hits alongside London news, traffic and weather, 
presented by some of London’s best known radio voices is, we believe, a winning 
formula and we hope London’s listeners will warmly welcome their new radio 
station,” he said.
