
What do my tattoos say about me?

“My tattoos are my personal art collection. They say I’m brave but not 
rebellious, really. I live in the countryside near Carlisle, I have three cats 
and I am training to be a pilates instructor.”

What her tattoos say about Annie

Tattoos <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tattoos> are fairly common these 
days. Most footballers are living needle-art and I can’t think of many of my 
friends who don’t have some form of permanent marker stamped somewhere on their 
body. But full-on tats, like Annie’s, are still a talking point. At least they 
are when they’re first encountered. The strange thing about them is that they 
disappear very quickly. You stop noticing them after five minutes and then you 
never really see them again.

Still, Annie’s tattoos are big: designed to be noticed. When tattoos take up 
that amount of space they’re often about knitting together smaller, older 
tattoos. Making the disparate, the random, into one whole. It’s as though the 
tattooed person wants to make sense of their past, to draw together the 
emotions that caused them to have the separate tattoos in the first place. To 
make all their previous selves into one united person.

Annie’s tattoos are not fashionable. They’re recognisably post-1990s, but 
they’re not of the moment. They’re not Instagram tats. Instagram tattoos are 
small and black, inspirational words or significant dates. Arrows and teeny 
dots. Hipster tattoos are scratchy, badly drawn things that recall the ones we 
made in school with a compass and ink.

But Annie’s are mostly flowers – pretty things – plus a phoenix and a ship in 
full sail. These are classic symbols: romance, life, rebirth, freedom, a big 
world, a desire to enjoy life and its natural elements. They don’t reference 
death or past loves. They’re about Annie and her life now. Judging by her 
expression, she likes her life. And we should look at her smile. They’re 
emotional people, the tattooed. Their tattoos are just an introduction, their 
way of telling us about themselves. Despite their decoration, what most 
tattooed people want us to see is the person underneath.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
