
From Angenäm fruit bowl to lampshade

If you can't afford one of Tom Dixon's dark metal lampshades with a hammered 
copper interior, try the next best thing. Introducing the £17 Angenäm fruit 
bowl, which is just waiting to be reborn as a design classic. Use a black £3 
Hemma light cord, also from Ikea, to keep it on a budget.

Your list:
Angenäm fruit bowl 
Hemma light cord set in black or other light fitting
Lightbulb – E27, max 60w

Step 1
Measure your fitting to select the right size hole saw.

Step 2
Mark the centre for the hole clearly. Make a small dent in the centre using a 
hammer and nail – this gives the hole saw something to grab on to.

Step 3
Slowly and steadily, with the bowl on a non-slip surface, use the hole saw 
attachment to drill through the bowl.

Step 4
The hole will have very sharp edges, so be very careful as you secure
the fitting.

Original idea from ikeahackers.net <http://www.ikeahackers.net/>

From Expedit storage cube to doll's house
 Do Something - March - Ikea hacks - Expedit storage Photograph: Guardian 
The Expedit storage system (soon to become Kallax) is the epitome of design 
simplicity. It's basically an MDF box with shelves. But look at it another way 
and it's a doll's house, just waiting for new inhabitants to move in – along 
with their tiny Ikea furniture.

Your list:
Expedit 2x2 cube
Fine-grade sandpaper
Primer
Paint (gloss or eggshell)
Wallpaper, at least 80cm wide x 100cm high

Step 1
If you'd like to paint your Expedit, you will need to sand and prime it first 
so that the paint (best to use gloss or eggshell) has something to stick to.

Step 2
Cut out a piece of wallpaper to sit behind your doll's house. Either paste 
this to the wall or to a strong bit of card that you can then attach to the 
house.

Original idea from 101woonideeen.nl <http://www.101woonideeen.nl/>

Pimp up your Rast drawers
 Do Something - March - Ikea hacks - Rast drawers Photograph: Guardian 
These simple £20 drawers are a perfect blank canvas for your imagination. You 
could try painting the drawer fronts with different shades of the same colour, 
or cover them with paper instead. We've attached smart leather straps for 
handles, but you could use knobs, rope – whatever takes your fancy.

Your list:
Paintbrush
White paint 
Coloured paint 
Leather, enough to make 6 strips for drawer pulls
6 x 5mmx25mm bolts
6 x nuts

Step 1
The Rast doesn't have a smooth finish so there is no need to sand it. Paint 
one of the drawers with your paint. Add another 2-3 coats, letting it dry in 
between.

Step 2
Add white paint to your original colour, and paint the second drawer. Add more 
white to paint the last one.

Step 3
Use a stanley knife and a metal ruler to cut 6 strips measuring 18cm long and 
3cm wide. Fold each strip and drill 5mm holes about 1cm from one end.

Step 4
Push a 5mm bolt through the leather and the predrilled holes, screw on a nut 
and you're done.

Original idea from ikeahackers.net <http://www.ikeahackers.net/>

Find a hackspace

If you have an idea for a project, and are lacking the space and equipment, 
what you need is a hackspace – a workshop where people share space, tools and 
skills. There is usually a small membership charge but some, such as 
Sheffield's Access Space, are free. Whether you're working on software, 
hardware, crafts or performance, find your local site via theUK Hackspace 
Foundation <http://www.hackspace.org.uk/view/Main_Page>. Here are three of the 
best:

Makespace Cambridge
This space calls itself "the community's inventing shed", and can accommodate 
everything from jewellery-making, woodwork and glasswork to electronics and 
textiles. Membership is £40/month.
16 Mill Lane, Cambridge CB2 1RX; makespace.org <http://makespace.org/>

Access Space
This workshop provides, at no charge, space, tools and open-source software 
for people to share and develop skills.
Unit 1, AVEC Building, 3-7 Sidney Street, Sheffield S1 4RG; access-space.org 
<http://access-space.org/doku.php>

Blackhorse Workshop
This space offers wood- and metal- working equipment, work space and regular 
classes. £18/day, £42/month, special offers until the end of March.
1-2 Sutherland Rd Path, London E17 6BX; blackhorseworkshop. co.uk 
<http://www.blackhorseworkshop.co.uk/>

Over to you: share your hacks

Ikea basics can be transformed in so many ways. We'd love to see the clever 
things you have done with Ikea pieces. And we'd like to use our favourites in 
the April issue of Do Something, so please upload high-resolution images.

• This article was amended on 24 March 2014. An earlier version referred to 
Cambridge Makespace rather than Makespace Cambridge and wrongly listed their 
address as 12, rather than 16 Mill Lane, Cambridge.
