
The Sporades, which stretch out into the Aegean off Greece's eastern coast, 
consist of 24 islands, but only four of these are permanently inhabited: 
Skiathos, Skopelos, Alonissos and Skyros.

Skiathos is the most-travelled of the islands thanks to its international 
airport, and its fame lies mainly in its sandy beaches. Away from the coast you 
can still find isolated hiking trails and the odd Byzantine monastery.

Skopelos is larger, but less visited than Skiathos. Its rugged scenery is 
perhaps more beautiful and certainly less developed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2005/jun/18/greece.guardiansaturdaytravelsection>
. Its charms were celebrated in the film Mamma Mia!.

Much more rugged Alonissos lies in the middle of a marine park and is 
surrounded by a group on uninhabited satellite islands. Visitors have increased 
in the last decade or so, but it retains an exclusive air and some exceptional 
hiking routes.

Skyros is by far the least visited of the traditional Sporades, at least by 
non-Greeks (there is a domestic airport). Those prepared to find their way 
here, however, are amply rewarded by an atmosphere that blends traditional 
Greek village life with an increasingly trendy "alternative" vibe.

Although not strictly part of the Sporades, Evia also lies off Greece's 
eastern coast. The second largest island in Greece after Crete, and located 
conveniently close to Athens, it should be much better known (classicists might 
recognise it as Euboea). From its fertile north to the mountainous south it 
offers a wealth of travel opportunities.

All prices are for one week's accommodation for two in August, and include 
breakfast unless otherwise stated. Prices outside of this month can be 
considerably cheaper. You can usually expect to eat well for €15-20 per person. 
If eating places are cheaper/more expensive than this it is stated in the text.

FF = family-friendly

Southern Skiathos
 Vromolimnos beach. Photograph: Alamy 
Where to stay: Skiathos Holidays 
Skiathos caters mainly to package tours but these apartments and villas, 
located right by sandy Vromolimnos beach in the south of the island, offer 
stylish white-washed accommodation among the pine forest and the bougainvillea 
of their gardens. The accommodation is simple but good value and also quietly 
sophisticated.
• +30 24270 21596, 21597, skiathos-holidays.gr,  
<http://www.skiathos-holidays.gr/>€630, breakfast €6 (children free), FF

Where to eat: Taverna Stathis 
Just five minutes' walk away, this traditional taverna is renowned as one of 
the best on the island, with a changing menu based on what is fresh that day 
(this should be true of every good taverna). Leave room for the baked apple and 
yoghurt dessert.
• +30 24270 23508, panghaig.com/tavernastathis 
<http://www.panghaig.com/tavernastathis/>

Don't miss
Skiathos is all about the beaches, and the fine sandy strip of Vromolimnos is 
one of the prettiest. It is more low key than some, but still lined with cafes 
and offers waterskiing.

Skiathos Town
 Bourtzi Boutique Hotel 
Where to stay: Bourtzi Boutique Hotel
For a different slant on Skiathos try this haven of designer living right in 
the heart of Skiathos Town. The hotel offers elegant, marble-lined rooms, and a 
courtyard pool, while the old town is a warren of back streets and squares that 
are a delight to explore. Meanwhile Skiathos' many beaches are only a short 
drive or bus ride away.
• +30 24270/21304, hotelbourtzi.gr <http://www.hotelbourtzi.gr/>, €1200

Where to eat: The Final Step 
Probably the best dining in town, if not the Aegean. The Final Step is run by 
Pam and offers her modern Mediterranean twist on local produce; for instance 
the grilled octopus starter is not only perfectly tender but comes with the 
added flavour of a sweet chili sauce.
• +30 24270 21877, finalsteprestaurant.com 
<http://www.finalsteprestaurant.com/>, slightly expensive

Don't miss
A trip to Kastro, the old fortified capital of the island, is well worth the 
effort. Abandoned in the early 19th century, little now remains on the 
atmospheric headland apart from the ruins of its defences and the town's many 
churches. You can get here on various boat excursions from the port, but the 
experience is more authentic if you lace on your hiking boots.

Skopelos Town
 Thea Home Hotel 
Where to stay: Thea Home Hotel 
Skopelos Town is perhaps the most attractive and unspoilt of all the harbour 
towns of the Sporades, and this simple hotel lies at the heart of it. The rooms 
may be basic, but they are also clean and functional and offer great views down 
to the port. The local cheese pies for breakfast are becoming legendary.
• +30 24240 22859, theahomehotel.com <http://www.theahomehotel.com/>, €525

Where to eat: Finikas
Finikas is a traditional family-run taverna (Lambros masterminds the food, and 
his two sons serve it up) with the best view over the harbour. Lambros 
specialises in the standard Greek dishes with the occasional local flavour – 
try the pork stuffed with apple and plums.
• +30 24240 23247, finikasrestaurant.gr <http://www.finikasrestaurant.gr/>

Don't miss
For great beaches head to the west coast of the island. Kastani is famous as 
the beach in Mamma Mia, but as a result can be overcrowded. For more unspoilt 
bathing you're better off heading on to isolated Armenopetra, where two pebble 
beaches split the crystal clear waters.

Port of Loutraki, Skopelos
 Church of Ayios Ioannis, used in the wedding scene of the film Mamma Mia! 
Photograph: Robert Harding Picture Library L/Alamy 
Where to stay: Hotel Selenunda
First the bad news; the rooms could be described as a bit spartan, and the 
steep steps up to the hotel shouldn't be attempted with luggage. On the other 
hand, a quick call to Karen and Babis will secure a lift up from the northern 
port of Loutraki, and most of your time in your room will be spent on the 
balcony admiring the views over to Skiathos, particularly as the sun sets.
• +30 2424 0 34 073, hotelselenunda.com <http://www.hotelselenunda.com/>, 
€490, no breakfast

Where to eat: Steki tou Masteras
 Every Greek holiday should include a good local grill house, and this one, 
3km from Loutraki in the town of Glossa, is one of the best. Nothing fancy, 
just meat perfectly cooked over charcoal, along with more great views.
• +30 24240 33563, cheap

Don't miss
 The wedding chapel from Mamma Mia looked like a piece of CGI perfection, but 
it's a real place, Ayios Ioannis Kastri. Steps lead up from the sandy cove to 
the improbably located church. Its movie associations mean that coach and boat 
trips can spoil the romance, but come in the late afternoon or early evening 
and you might enjoy the place to yourselves.

Patitiri, Alonissos
 View over Alonissos old town. Photograph: Alamy 
Where to stay: Camping Rocks 
This campsite, a few hundred metres away from the island's main port of 
Patitiri, is not as uncomfortable as it sounds. In fact it is that rare thing 
among Greek campsites and is based around tents rather than camper vans. Plenty 
of shade and the eponymous rocky beach just metres away lend themselves to lazy 
days. Facilities are basic.
• +30 24240 65410, alonissos.gr 
<http://alonissos.gr/en/accommodation-in-alonissos/rooms-to-let/camping-rocks.html>
, €100, no breakfast, FF

Where to eat: To Kamaki
When you're this close to the sea you may as well go with fish, and the place 
to do this is at a traditionalouzeri, where seafood plates, large and small, 
are accompanied by plenty of ouzo (or any other drink you fancy). Back near the 
port, To Kamaki is a fantastic example of the breed. Ignore the menu and go 
with advice on what's good that day.
• +30 24240 65245

Don't miss
Alonissos is great for hiking and one of the easiest trails is up the cobbled 
kalderimi, or old mule path, to Hora. This was the old capital of the island, 
abandoned after an earthquake in 1965. The views are immense; on a good day as 
far as Mount Athos, the semi-autonomous monks' republic in northern Greece.

Patitiri, Alonissos
 Eleonas resturant 
Where to stay: Ikion Eco Boutique Hotel
Also close to the port, but slightly more refined, this stylish little hotel 
(14 rooms including 4 family rooms) offers all the comforts one would want. 
Renovated by the Athanasiou family in 2011, the traditional building now has 
modern, but tasteful, furnishings. The service, from the welcoming home-made 
lemonade to the breakfast based around local products, is top class.
• +30 24240 66360, ikion.com <http://www.ikion.com/>,€740, breakfast €10, FF 

Where to eat: Eleonas 
A drive up the coast, or a boat ride, takes you to the pretty pebble beach of 
Leftos Gialos, opposite the islet of Peristera. Right on the beach is this 
traditional, yet funky, taverna run by Nikos and the talented Magdna. She 
produces all the normal taverna favourites as well as more unusual dishes, such 
astzitzirafa, the tops of the wild pistachio tree cooked in olive oil and lemon.
• +30 24240 66066, eleonas-alonissos.gr <http://www.eleonas-alonissos.gr/>

Don't miss
 Alonissos, and its neighbouring, uninhabited, islets, form the heart of a 
national marine park. This was founded in 1992, chiefly to protect the 
surviving population of the Mediterranean monk seal. You'll be lucky to see one 
of these, but boat excursions around the islets are still well worth it, and 
dolphin sightings are not uncommon.

Skyros
 A woman on a writing holiday on Skyros 
Where to stay: Skyros 
The island of Skyros has a distinctly alternative feel, which is partly down 
to this company, who have been promoting "lifestyle" holidays here for the past 
25 years. Accommodation, in two locations, is basic, and the emphasis is on the 
plentiful courses provided, from yoga to writing. Participants come back year 
after year and many describe the experience as "life changing".
• +44 1983 86 55 66, skyros.com <http://www.skyros.com/>,€840

Where to eat: Istories tou Barba
The Skyros courses include buffet meals, but if you want to explore the 
island, a good trip would be up to the beach at Molos where this ouzeri, 
"Stories from your Uncle", has an enviable location right by the sand. They 
cook a mean lobster; prices are by the kilo, so don't be alarmed and get them 
to weigh and price your choice.
• +30 22220 91453

Don't miss 
The alternative vibe on Skyros has been going on longer than you imagine. If 
you can, come for the annual Goat Dance, held before Lent starts. In this 
distinctly pagan festival men dressed as goats "marry" local maidens (also men 
dressed up). It's as wild as it sounds.

Enoria, east coast of Evia
 Little Stone Villa 
Where to stay: Little Stone Villa
Evia is little visited by non-Greeks, and those who do come tend to stay in 
all inclusive resorts. The alternative is to stay in private villas. This 
example, in the tiny village of Enoria near the east coast of the island, 
revels in its isolation, but is well equipped and has a private pool and 
breathtaking views.
• +44 7939 174714, littlestonevilla.com <http:>, €1,330, sleeps 6, no 
breakfast, FF

Where to eat: Vrahos
 Set on the small square of Steni (see below) this mountain taverna 
specialises in meat-based dishes, either from the oven or the grill. Mountain 
spring water emanates mysteriously from a tap in a nearby tree.
• +30 22280 51546

Don't miss
The road up the mountains to Steni from the east coast is spectacular, and 
do-able in a normal car even when not paved. The village itself is famed for 
its mountain air and spring water and is surrounded by hiking trails.

Pefki, northern Evia
 Altamar Hotel, Evia 
Where to stay: Altamar Hotel 
Northern Evia is known for its fertility and this is certainly evident in the 
lushly green views afforded by this brand new hotel in Pefki. The minimalist 
design hides the fact that this is a friendly, family-run place. The 
surrounding countryside abounds in outdoor activities, including horse-riding, 
jeep trails and hiking.
• +30 22260 41437 altamar.gr, <http://www.altamar.gr/> €525

Where to eat: Astron 
Just outside the elegant port of Limni and 100 metres from the beach, this 
seafood based taverna has a great location. The Ioannou family were originally 
fishermen, and still bring in the catch and cook it fresh to order
• +30 22270 31487

Don't miss 
Just to the south of Limni is the monastery of Ayiou Nikolaou Galataki, set on 
the wooded slopes of the mountains overlooking the mainland. The setting is 
superb, and the pretty white-washed complex is well worth the trip. If you are 
lucky, one of the few resident nuns will show you around.

Karystos, southern Evia


Where to stay: Aegea Hotel 
Karystos is the main resort of southern Evia, and its neoclassical waterfront 
is mainly frequented by Greeks. The Aegea Hotel, just out of town, offers great 
views in a tranquil location. A swimming pool, and even some see-saws and 
swings, will keep the kids happy. Babis, the owner, knows the area well and can 
advise on lots of places to explore.
• +30 22240 27350, aegeahotel.com <http://www.aegeahotel.com/>, €875, FF

Where to eat: Cavo D'Oro
There are plenty of tavernas on the waterfront at Karystos, but for a bit of 
authenticity you need to explore the alleyways behind. This establishment has 
been run by the same family since 1897. Forget menus and take a look at what's 
going on in the kitchen to spot what you want.
• +30 22240 22326

Don't miss 
Southern Evia is all about the mountains, including the forbidding heights of 
Mount Ohi (1,399m), which has several hiking trails up it. An easier walk, but 
still hugely rewarding, takes you down the Dhimosari Gorge below the mountain. 
The route follows old, cobbled mule paths and passes watermills on the way. 
Start in the morning and you'll be enjoying a picnic on the beach by lunchtime.
