
The 3 million opposite-sex cohabiting couple families in the UK should keep an 
eye on the House of Commons this week. A 10-minute rule bill on 21 October by 
Tim Loughton MP will propose changing the law to permit these “happily 
unmarried” couples to enter into civil partnerships. Currently, only same-sex 
couples can enter into a civil partnership, but MPs from across parliament, 
including Stephen Twigg, Caroline Lucas and Andy Slaughter, agree that the law 
as it stands is nonsensical on this point and change is well overdue.

The courts also agree that there are questions over whether the current policy 
contravenes the UK’s equality legislation: permission has been granted for a 
judicial review to take place on 19-20 January 2016. There are many men and 
women don’t feel comfortable with the symbolism and cultural baggage of 
marriage, while others have had negative experiences that have turned them away 
from the institution. Yet for refusing to partake in marriage, they are 
discriminated against and denied the same legal and financial rights as couples 
who do. Unmarried partners (even those with children) do not qualify for the 
inheritance tax and pension benefits being showered by George Osborne on 
“couples” (married or same-sex civil partners). Many of these opposite-sex 
couples would like to qualify by registering a civil partnership, like same-sex 
couples who do not wish to marry.

Of course there are arguments against opening up civil partnerships to all 
couples, regardless of sex or sexual orientation. But they end up sounding like 
countless other arguments throughout history where majorities in the ascendancy 
have turned a deaf ear to the pleas for equal treatment from people with views 
that differ from their own. We, supporters of theCampaign for Equal Civil 
Partnerships <http://equalcivilpartnerships.org.uk/>, just want equal 
treatment. If you believe in equality, and want to see the law reflect that, 
contact your MP and ask them to support the bill on the 21st.
Ava Lee Campaign for Equal Civil Partnerships
Martin Loat CEO, Propeller Group
Fiona Millar Journalist and education campaigner
Gemma Mortensen Yale world fellow
Elsie Owusu Architect
Charles Keidan
Dr Rebecca Steinfeld Political scientist
Peter Tatchell Human Rights Campaigner
Robert Wintemute Professor of human rights law, King’s College London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
