
Tilly, who's 11, wants to know when she can get a Facebook account. "Not for a 
long time," I say, recalling media stories of paedophiles posing as teenage 
boys. Her use of Facebook will be something else for me to regulate. I have 
enough things to say "enough" to as it is.

"Why do you need something else to stop you from doing your homework when you 
have the television, your mobile phone and YouTube already?"

"Everyone in my class has a Facebook account," she says, not entirely 
answering the question.

"Everyone?" I ask archly, thinking of a mother I've always thought is as 
controlling as me. "What about X?"

"Ha. Her mother lets her. So there," says Tilly. "There's a Facebook account 
you can get that has safety things. You can't argue with that."

But I do argue with that, although I'm relieved she didn't just set it up on 
the sly. As she gets older, it will be harder to watch over her.

As it is, my hovering (as I believe it's called) focuses mainly on Lydia and 
baby Flora because they can't escape from me so easily.

I get an insight into that hovering/controlling on a bright, freezing day as 
Lydia and I push Flora in a baby swing. Flora flops over the front of the 
swing, trying to teethe on the metal bar. But we still manage to eavesdrop on 
the conversations of other parents who are running through their children's 
after-school regimes. "K would love to do gymnastics on Mondays but she is sooo 
booked up. The one day she did have left she's just started doing yoga with her 
dad," says one mother.

I swear K, who is in an adjacent swing, is only eight.

I take a sideways look at Lydia who has a pretty full after-school schedule 
herself. "Do you feel you've got too much on sometimes?" I ask her.

Lydia pulls a mournful face. "Yes," she says, pausing for dramatic effect. 
"Sometimes I just want to have my childhood back."

So we run through the things she does and what she could cut out. None of the 
things on her list of potential cuts matches what's on mine.

"Well, we might have to reduce lots of the things we do," I say as a way of 
winning the argument. "We're in a recession."

The only person in our family who doesn't need to reduce his activities is 
Sam, my 22-year-old, who has returned home from making an album with his 
friends in Liverpool because he's run out of money.

"J and I can't say that can we?" I say to him. "We can't just go, 'Oh dear, 
we've run out of money,' we have to pay the mortgage and buy food."

"I'm going to get a job," says Sam, and disappears to another friend's house 
for two days in the hope I'll forget.

I can't hover over Maddy because she's at university, and although I really 
want to phone her every day to ask if she's eating and studying enough, I 
control myself. "Are you having a good time?" I text instead. "Hope you are 
having fun."

My record of hovering over baby Flora is wrecked when I turn my back (for one 
second, I swear) to throw something in the wastepaper basket. Flora, who's 
lying on the bed, tumbles on to the floor – her fall only partially broken by 
my desperate outstretched arm. "She's not even crying," says J, reassuringly. 
"She's over it already."

I replay that fall in lingering slow motion, worrying that my reflexes are too 
slow now for a new baby, and take the rest of the day to get over it.
