
Freshly sharpened pencils sit neatly on a table that still smells of wood. 
Five never-sat-on bright red chairs are tucked underneath. Paper is put out. 
The books on the shelf are straightened. We wait. There is a knock at the door. 
Into the writing centre tumble a class of children, full of excitement, and so 
they should be.

Jubilee primary school is the first to visit this most unusual of venues – a 
monster suppplies shop doubling as a writing space, which was opened on Friday 
by authorNick Hornby <https://www.theguardian.com/books/nickhornby>. The 
centre's director, Lucy Macnab, explains to the children that there is a secret 
door they must open to enter. "What's the password?" she asks. "Monsters!!!" 
they yell.

The secret door swings open, and the children run noisily into the room, 
careering towards a red mat where they shuffle into place cross-legged. There's 
no time to waste, they are told; 30 stories are needed by lunchtime. Are they 
up to the task? "Yes!!!".

This is the moment the other volunteers and I have been waiting for. To see 
their reaction. The Ministry of Stories is finally open for business, after 
months of planning and painting, and the preparation of monster products. The 
pioneering literacy project is inspired by the success of novelist Dave 
Eggers's innovative 826 writing programme in the US. It is an oasis away from 
the classroom and curriculum targets where there is space and time to write.

"There is a definite need to improve literacy and writing skills for young 
people in the UK," says Macnab, who, along with Ben Payne, founded and directs 
the centre.

As this year's Sats results show, there is much room for improvement with 
writing in schools, especially among boys. While almost 80% of girls achieved 
level 4 in writing in this year's English tests at key stage 2, only 64% of 
boys did. And while more than a quarter of girls gained level 5, this target 
was reached by only 15% of boys.

What better role model to inspire boys to write than Hornby, who became 
involved in the project in February. He hopes that visiting the centre will 
give confidence to young writers. "The Ministry of Stories is a place to 
inspire young people and encourage them to engage with story-telling at every 
level," he says.

Certainly, in taking lessons from 826, the Ministry of Stories has every 
chance of great success. Eggers set up the San Francisco project after he 
realised that one-to-one teaching time was missing during English classes. It 
was so well received that seven more centres were set up around America. More 
than 22,000 students a year are now given writing encouragement there.

Eggers believes the Ministry of Stories will be "life-changing" for the young 
people who attend the centre. "For many years we've hoped that someone would 
bring the idea to England," he says.

There are hopes to expand the project beyond London. But first, says Payne, 
further sponsorship is needed to see the Ministry of Stories through its first 
three years. Funding so far has been provided from Arts Council England and the 
JJ Charitable Trust.

The Ministry also relies heavily on a small army of volunteer writers, 
teachers and artists – of which I am a part. More volunteers are still needed 
to help with one-to-one mentoring with writing. The project shares with 826 the 
belief that volunteers and the neighbourhood in which the project is based 
should be involved.

So, after a home for the Ministry was found on a shopping street in Hoxton, 
east London, volunteers spent week after week sanding and painting the walls 
and taking part in a DIY frenzy. On the days in the run-up to the opening, 
you'd have been hard-pushed to find a spare paintbrush.

Involvement in a project on this level is the dream "big society" scenario – 
everyone who volunteers knows "we made this happen". But creating a project 
with such strong foundations is no small task. It wasn't just the obvious 
appeal of working in a monster shop that drew in 200 volunteers and 
high-profile writers, including Zadie Smith and the former children's laureate 
Michael Morpurgo.

At the root of the whole project is a shared love of words, and the valuable 
chance to pass this on to the next generation.

As many of those involved know, getting started with writing (in general, and 
with each blank page) takes a bit of doing. And so, for the class from Jubilee 
school, and every class who will visit after them, the story is begun as a 
group.

"What does a story include?" Macnab asks. Hands shoot up, eager. "Exciting 
words!" "Yes." "Imagination." "Good. What else?" "Beginning, middle and end."

By process of an eyes-closed vote, a main character (Bob The Fat Man) is 
chosen. His accomplice in this tale, the children decide, is The Man With No 
Name.

"What is Bob's greatest dream?"

"To be skinny."

"What's he scared of?"

"He's scared of hair."

While the children dream up core elements of their story, an illustrator 
stands at the front, bringing their creation to life.

Next, with the help of Payne as typist, the children begin writing their 
story, line by line.

This is what they write: "There is a knock on the door and there's The Man 
With No Name and he offers to tell him his destiny. He opens the door and The 
Man With No Name offers him a magic exercise book from behind his back. He 
opens the book, there's nothing written in it and so he says: 'what's my 
destiny?'

"Every time you write in it, you'll get an exercise and you'll get much 
skinnier."

The children cheer "Yes!" when a popular suggestion is chosen. Ideas are 
almost visibly bursting out of them as they strain to stretch their hands in 
the air.

The story gets to a cliff-hanger and the children go off to tables round the 
room to begin work on the second half alone. Now is the time for the mentors to 
make sure that the hurdle of the blank page is cleared. In training, all of the 
volunteer mentors went through this story-writing process.

Going round two tables of children, I listen to gabble after gabble of idea 
after idea. Bob the Fat Man's life spirals off in all manner of directions. 
These imaginations are children's – so much more effortlessly agile than 
adults' could ever be. "Write it down!" "Great, write it down!" is all that 
they need. Soon, lines are pouring on to their pages.

I look round at a room full of young writers, busy, focused, engaged. This is 
exactly what all the writers who have backed The Ministry of Stories were 
hoping for, I think.

The project has an impressive roll call of supporters, including Roddy Doyle, 
founder of the 826-inspired Fighting Words, in Dublin, former poet laureate Sir 
Andrew Motion, award-winning playwright Kwame Kwei-Armah, and Curtis Brown 
prize winner Joe Dunthorne.

The advisory panel includes Zadie Smith, award-winning writer Meera Syal, and 
poet and illustrator Laura Dockrill.

"If I could have also bought monster accessories at the same time as learning 
to put together a decent sentence ... it would have been heaven," says Zadie 
Smith.

On sale in the monster shop (open to the general public at weekends), is 
tinned fear in varieties such as A Vague Sense of Unease, The Collywobbles, or 
Escalating Panic (£8 a tin). Also on sale are Thickest Human Snot (lemon curd) 
and Olde Fashioned Brain Jam (£5 a jar).

For the pupils who visit, there is, however, a much more personal memento. As 
the class from Jubilee school finish their stories and stand up to read them 
out, the very first Ministry of Stories books begin to roll off the press. On 
the cover of each is the (voted-on) title: The New Adventures of Bob. Each 
cover is also printed with a different child's name.

Clutching their books proudly, the children line up, coats on, ready to go.

They pile out. The door shuts behind them. Pencils are scattered everywhere. 
Chairs are askew. The volunteers tidy up. The centre is silent. Now, there is 
something missing. The story of the ministry has begun.

• Schools interested in taking part should email info@ministryofstories.org 
<mailto:info@ministryofstories.org> The fee from this article will be donated 
to The Ministry of Stories. Donations can be made by emailingdonate@ministryof 
stories.org <mailto:donate@ministryof stories.org> or phoning 0207 729 4159
