
The rarest farm animal in the British Isles is the Northern Dairy Shorthorn. 
There are 24 breeding females left which, according to the watchlist of the 
Rare Breeds Survival Trust (RBST), puts them into the "critical" category.

I was reminded of the RBST when I went to see Bill Howes' Tamworth pigs last 
week. I had known for years of its work monitoring the comings and goings of 
British farm animals and poultry, but, if I am honest, I had never given much 
thought to its business. While talking to Howes, though, it dawned on me how 
little we know in general about the animals that once fed the nation. When I 
was growing up, I had the Observer's Book Of Farm Animals, which listed all 
manner of beasts, many of which have disappeared (along with my copy of the 
book, I am sad to say). Gone the Lincolnshire Curly Coat pig, whose piglets 
were born with a fleece to protect them from the cruel winds from the North 
Sea. Gone, too, the Cumberland pig, whose meat went into the Cumberland sausage.

Once, different farm animals were produced by selective breeding in different 
parts of the country, because they made the most of different conditions - for 
example, Aberdeen Angus and Welsh Black cattle are small, slow-growing breeds 
that can survive on the marginal grazing. The Gloucester Old Spot was the pig 
with built-in apple sauce, because it ate the windfalls in the orchards along 
the Severn valley. The British Lop was known as a "cottage pig" because many 
cottagers kept one to feed on scraps.

However, in the bright, streamlined, industrial world of postwar agriculture, 
too many of these animals were found wanting in terms of modern productivity. 
Never mind the eating quality, it was the conversion rate, yield and output we 
wanted. Who needs flavour or texture when you can have productivity? And so 
numbers dwindled and some vanished, 20 unique breeds between 1900 and 1970.

Since RBST was set up in 1973, we haven't lost one, although pure-bred 
Aberdeen Angus, Chillingham Wild cattle, Northern Dairy Shorthorn, Vaynol 
cattle, Boreray sheep, Bagot goats and Marsh Daisy and Orpington poultry are 
all critical. So why should we worry about them?

"It's not just a sentimental project to preserve our agricultural heritage, 
even though our countryside was shaped by Leicester Longwool sheep, White Park 
cattle and Large Black pigs," says Dawn Teverson, RBST's conservation officer. 
"These breeds are important genetic resources. We have yet to identify many of 
their genes, and it is quite possible they will have genetic material that will 
prove to be resistant to certain parasites or diseases such as Bluetongue."

To this end RBST monitors breed populations; carries out blood and DNA typing 
and scientific evaluation; advises on breeding programmes; maintains vital gene 
banks; encourages people to keep rare breeds, and offers advice and 
information; provides registration facilities for rare breed stock, 
advertising, shows and sales; educates, informs and promotes rare breeds, 
especially among agricultural colleges; and lobbies government both at home and 
in Europe.

RBST is wholly independent, and funded entirely by membership. So hurry, 
hurry, hurry and join up. "Consumers have a critical part to play in protecting 
these breeds," Teverson says. "And at a time when many people want to know more 
about what they are eating, where it came from and how it was cared for, their 
support for our work is vital."

Speaking personally, on the whole I worry rather more about the survival of 
Boreray sheep and Marsh Daisy poultry than I do about the snow leopard or the 
hairy-nosed wombat, if only on the grounds that I would like the chance to eat 
them.
