
If you are applying for an newly-qualified teacher (NQT) position, you’ll 
almost certainly be asked to teach a demonstration lesson.

While it’s incredibly hard to get a job, it’s easy to let the pressures of the 
application process grind you down. But before you panic, here are some tips on 
how to prepare your test lesson effectively:

1. What’s the brief?

Read the brief carefully – make sure you know what’s expected of you. In 
secondary that might be quite detailed if it’s a practical session like 
physical education (PE), IT, technology or the sciences (though science 
practicals usually eat up too much time so they’re more likely to ask for a 
theoretical science lesson).

In primary, briefs can be much shorter, for example, “Read a story to a class 
of year 1” or “Teach a year 5 group on a topic of your choice”. These are 
intended to test your initiative and how creative you are in interpreting such 
a brief.

2. Who will I teach?

This could be any class within the phase you have trained for, but you should 
be told the specific year group in the brief. If not, ask. Try not to worry too 
much about whether the little buggers will behave; it’s unlikely the school 
will give you a challenging class. Senior staff will be observing too – usually 
the head of department and the deputy headteacher – so the kids should be on 
their best behaviour.

3. What can I ask for in advance?

Be careful about this because the way you set up and organise yourself – how 
creative and well prepared you are, and how much initiative you show – is part 
of what is being assessed. On the other hand, it shows initiative that you have 
bothered to phone and ask some clarifying questions, such as whether there will 
be any English as an additional language, special educational needs or “looked 
after” students in the group. Will there be a teaching assistant in the room 
and who will they work with?

4. Should I bring my own resources?

Don’t ask for 20 laminated colour photocopies of your favourite worksheet five 
minutes before the demo lesson is due to start – that won’t go down well. But 
if you have your own favourite resources, bring them. It’s not unreasonable to 
ask if any resources are supplied, especially if there is a practical element – 
just don’t be too demanding of the school’s time and facilities. For example, 
if you are doing an art demo lesson and you want to teach a particular 
technique like batik then you’d be advised to bring your own stuff with you.

5. Will I be asked to provide a lesson plan?

Yes, most likely. Bring it with you on the day so the assessors can see what 
your goals are, how you intend to differentiate and show progress. But keep it 
very simple – bullet points on one side of paper is best. You may have planned 
X, Y and Z but don’t be frightened if you have to improvise too – that is the 
reality of teaching after all – and the assessors will want to see how you can 
think on your feet and respond to the unexpected.

6. What are they looking for?

More than anything, they want to see if you are a good model of teaching and 
learning. Are you an effective classroom teacher, confident about your subject 
knowledge, demonstrating good organisation and behaviour management? Do you 
have some presence with students? You could give the kids name badges or ask 
them to write their names on a folded sheet to place on their desks so you can 
learn a few during the lesson to show you can build relationships quickly.

7. How long will the demonstration lesson be?

It may as short as 15-20 minutes if it’s something like reading a story for a 
potential new primary schoolteacher. It may be much longer in secondary - 30-45 
minutes or even a double lesson if it’s an extended brief for English or maths.

8. Will there be parity with other candidates?

Probably not – or only as much as the school can accommodate in reasonable 
circumstances. For example, if the demo lesson is a PE practical, you might get 
those horrible year 9s while someone else gets a lovely sweet group of year 7s. 
Your demo lesson might take place before the formal interview while another 
candidate’s might be after it. The pressures of time and school organisation 
will determine the circumstances. Try not to be too pernickety about your 
rights to equal opportunities if the school is already doing its best to 
accommodate you.

9. Will the students have an input in to the final decision?

Quite often, yes. If the class you taught are not asked for their feedback on 
you, then you might be interviewed by the school council or a pupil panel. 
While their power is in the veto rather than in the appointment, you should 
take it seriously. I heard of a teacher who started sending text messages on 
his mobile phone during the pupil panel. He didn’t get the job.

10. It’s not about teaching the perfect lesson

Frances Child from King Edwards Consortium PGCE & School Direct 
<http://www.teachkec.org.uk/> in Birmingham prepares her trainees specifically 
for demo lessons. Her advice is: “Be prepared for nothing to go right – kids 
will come in late and disrupt you, the equipment won’t work and it’ll be 
raining just as you’re about to start your brilliant games lesson. Whatever 
happens, just get on with it.”

For a demo lesson, as in everything else, your attention to detail and your 
preparation must show through.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<http://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx?CMP=dis_42> for lesson 
resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=dis_1337>, direct to 
your inbox.
