
Kafteji

In Tunisia I came across a popular street food made from lots of fresh 
vegetables. Tunisians are obsessed with deep-frying, and they put all this veg 
in its prime into the deep-fat fryer and serve it with a deep-fried egg. That's 
seems a slight shame, but I can sort of see the point – after all, who doesn't 
have a soft spot for fried food? What I couldn't get my head around was the 
next stage, when the veg and egg are chopped up into a fine mush that's like 
baby food in both colour and texture. My take on the dish stops short of this. 
Kafteji is a great Sunday brunch dish with a good baguette. Serves four.

250ml sunflower oil
100ml olive oil, plus 1 tbsp extra
450g baby potatoes, cut into 5mm-thick slices
Salt and black pepper
2 courgettes, cut into 5mm-thick slices
2 green peppers, cut roughly into 5cm-square pieces
3 green chillies, cut into quarters lengthways and deseeded
5 medium tomatoes, quartered 
½ tsp white-wine vinegar
¾ tsp ras el hanout spice mix
1 tbsp harissa paste (Belazu 
<http://www.belazu.com/shop/buy/rose-harissa-paste.html>, ideally)
4 medium eggs

Pour both oils into a high-sided stockpot and place on medium to high heat. 
Test the oil's hot enough by dropping in a slice of potato – it should sink and 
then almost straight away form bubbles and rise to the surface. Add a third of 
the potatoes and fry for seven to 10 minutes, until soft and slightly crisp. 
Transfer to a plate covered with kitchen paper, sprinkle with salt and keep 
somewhere warm. Repeat with the remaining potatoes.

In the same oil, fry the courgettes for four to six minutes, remove, drain on 
separate kitchen paper and season with salt. Repeat with the green peppers 
(cook them for two to three minutes), chillies (one minute) and tomatoes (two 
to three minutes). Watch out though, the tomatoes will make the oil spit.

Transfer all the fried warm vegetables to a large bowl and add the vinegar, 
ras el hanout and harissa. Stir gently with your hands, trying not to break up 
the veg. Add salt and pepper to taste.

Remove most of the oil from the pan and fry the eggs, two at a time if need 
be, until the white is done and the yolk is still runny. Portion the vegetables 
and top with egg. Season again, and serve.

Tuna tartare with avocado, orange and chilli

Serves four to six as a first course.

2 medium tomatoes
2 small red chillies, deseeded and finely diced
Grated zest of 1 large orange (1½ tsp)
1½ tbsp lime juice
2 tsp olive oil, plus extra to finish
Salt and black pepper
1 medium-size ripe avocado
500g fresh tuna loin
4 spring onions, thinly sliced
1 small red pepper, deseeded and cut into 0.5cm dice
¼ tsp Aleppo chilli flakes (or other dried chilli flakes)
1 tsp cumin seeds, toasted and crushed 
20g pea shoots

Cut a thin slice off the end of each tomato. Grate the tomato flesh on the 
large holes of a grater. Use the skin to protect your fingers, then discard. 
Mix the flesh with half the fresh chilli, the orange zest, a teaspoon of the 
lime juice, the olive oil, one and a quarter teaspoons of salt and a generous 
grind of black pepper. Stir well and set aside.

Peel the avocado and discard the stone. Cut the flesh into 0.5cm dice, put in 
a small bowl with the rest of the lime juice and fresh chilli, and mix gently.

Dice the tuna into 0.5cm pieces and put it in a bowl with the spring onion. 
Pour the tomato dressing over the fish, add the diced red pepper, chilli flakes 
and cumin, stir, then add the avocado. Add salt to taste, fold through the pea 
shoots and serve.

• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi <http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk> 
andNopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com/> in London. His new book, Jerusalem, 
co-written with Sami Tamimi, is published by Ebury Press at £27. To order a 
copy for £16 (inc free UK mainland p&p), go totheguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091943745>
, or call 0330 333 6846.
