
Wheelers Oyster Bar, Whitstable & JoJo's Coffee House, Tankerton

If you know these two at all, it will be as very good and fairly upmarket 
restaurants. However, both Wheelers, which dates to 1856, and the much more 
modern JoJo's – a mile or two away in neighbouring Tankerton – have affordable 
arms that the budget traveller can enjoy. Don't be put off if the four stools 
at Wheelers cramped shop counter are already taken. You can pick up crab 
sandwiches, fantastic quiches (the crab and Béarnaise tartlets are seriously 
addictive), or make up your own portable fish platter, including your pick of 
rock oysters (half dozen, open to takeaway, £4.50), prawns, smoked eel, roll 
mops, hot smoked salmon etc. Nip across the road to the Offy (5 High Street) to 
grab a couple of cold beers from its wide selection of Kentish ales (from 
£1.79) and you have a meal fit for a king. If you're looking for a late sunset 
supper, both Wheelers and the Offy are open until 9pm.

Meanwhile, on the headland at Tankerton, the coffee shop at Nikki Billington's 
JoJo's (where, famously, you're charged double corkage if you BYO from Tesco) 
serves brilliant cakes, simple but good quality breakfast sandwiches, salads 
and seasonal specials. Some of the posh sandwiches (£6.95) – including a mean 
fish finger butty – probably don't offer as much bang for your buck as the 
stews. These might range, as the year progresses, from a sticky, wintry beef 
cheek number, to a more summery chicken, chorizo and red pepper one-pot. On a 
warm day, the patio area is a real sun trap.
• Wheelers: lunch from around £4, £10 a head would net you a handsome picnic; 
8 High Street, Whitstable, 01227 273311,wheelersoysterbar.com 
<http://www.wheelersoysterbar.com/>. JoJo's: breakfast £1.25-£3.50, sandwiches 
and mains £3.50-£7.95; 2 Herne Bay Road, Tankerton, Whitstable, 01227 274591,
jojosrestaurant.co.uk <http://www.jojosrestaurant.co.uk/>

Windy Corner Stores, Whitstable

This is a little off the main tourist drag but word is clearly out. On a 
sweltering day, Windy – part quirky corner shop, part serious foodie cafe – was 
packed. Little wonder, given the quality of my Moroccan lamb served with an 
assortment of jazzy, gourmet salads. The north African spicing was a little 
meek, but it barely mattered. The slices of explosively juicy, remarkably 
flavoursome lamb were cooked perfectly and ridged with caramelised fat. 
Elsewhere, the menu takes in interesting soups, sandwiches and salads, as well 
as other daily specials, such as orange-roasted pork or butternut squash and 
roasted vegetable frittata. Everything is available to takeaway, to the nearby 
beach, including beer (from £1.60, Red Stripe). It's a little cheaper if you do 
that, too. On a busy day, the service was stretched, but friendly.
• Breakfast £1.20-£7, lunch from £3.50. 110 Nelson Road, Whitstable, 01227 
771707,Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/windycornerstoresandcafe>

David Brown Delicatessen, Whitstable
 Photograph: Justin Sutcliffe 
Eager to get off the gastro trail and try somewhere with a local, rather than 
DFL (down from London) following, I wanted to run the rule overHoward's Kitchen 
<http://www.howards-kitchen.co.uk/> (mains £5.45-£8.75). However, it was 
shutting early, so, rather than "hearty, no-frills, home-cooked food", I had to 
settle for the affordable excellence of the delicatessen and bar, David Brown.

It's a tiny place, with the bar as close as you will come in the UK to the 
look and feel of a Spanish neighbourhood joint. There is a menu of small and 
sharing plates served into the evening (sandwiches, cured meats and cheeses, 
pork terrine, £2-£6), but the real bargain here is the lunch menu served from 
midday until 3pm. It's short: three nominal starters, one dessert, one hot main 
dish, but, drinking tap water, you could eat two courses for under £10. My 
plate of beautifully charred, perfectly pink feather steak –with a mess of 
soft, sharp lentils, seasoned with balsamic, basil, a little red pepper and 
onion – was fantastic. It wasn't the biggest plate of food I've ever eaten, but 
for £6.50 and rounded-off with a rather goodpastel de nata (£1.25) from the 
deli next door, it felt like a treat.
• Lunch dishes £3-£6.50. 28a Harbour Street, Whitstable, 01227 274507

The Wallflower Cafe, Herne Bay
 Wallflower cafe 
Hidden in an unpromising arcade on the High Street, the Wallflower is a 
laidback, faintly hippyish hang out. There is soothing folk music, you order at 
a brightly painted wooden counter, and, for 40p, you can add a shot of 
wheatgrass to your smoothie. Yum. The menu runs from sandwiches to specials, 
such as pan-fried rainbow trout, with around 50% of the options vegetarian. The 
falafel with pitta and hummus (the latter cleverly lifted with a little 
sun-dried tomato) comes as a huge plateful, which includes a mint-spiked 
tabbouleh and two generous and elaborate portions of salad. The falafel could 
have been more robustly seasoned and herbed, but they were ineffably light. All 
in all, the Wallflower is a cafe going that vital extra yard.
• Sandwiches £2.50-£3.50, meals £5-£8. 116 High Street, Herne Bay, 01227 
740392,Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Wallflower-Cafe/247922172895>

Great British Pizza Co, Margate

If Margate can be said to have a trendy, boho quarter, it's in and around the 
old town, the Market Place and the Parade, where you'll find vintage shops, art 
galleries, newer independent cafes and, just around the corner, on the front, 
this pizzeria – which is doing very good things indeed with Kent ingredients 
and a wood-fired oven. The restaurant itself is very now, in that it looks 
half-finished and features, as a centrepiece, a large, colourful portrait of a 
dog. Its menu is equally on point, with combinations such as parma ham and 
nectarine, and pear and cambozola blue cheese reflecting a new readiness among 
Britain's artisan pizzeria to innovate. I chose from the menu's more sedate 
core, but my sample ham and mushroom nonetheless sang with flavour. The base 
was surprisingly thin – ultra-slim, almost flatbread – but so fresh and easily 
digested that it banished any reservations. The tomato sauce, meanwhile, was 
supremely vibrant, one of most intense I have ever tasted. Flavourful ham and 
sweet pools of mozzarella (the toppings may look a bit sparse, but it's 
actually well-judged) sealed the deal. If you can stretch to it, you can round 
off your meal with tubs (£3.50) of ice-cream from, arguably, the country's best 
gelato maker,Gelupo <http://www.gelupo.com/> of Soho, London.

Talking of wood-fired pizza, if you're in neighbouring Broadstairs, check-out 
Posillipo <http://posillipo.co.uk/> (£5.95-£11.95). The Canterbury branch was 
reviewed in a previous feature in this series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/14/cheap-places-to-eat-canterbury>, 
and its pizzas are a significant cut-above the high street norm.
• Pizzas £6-£9. 14a Marine Drive, Margate, 01843 297700, 
greatbritishpizzacompany.wordpress.com 
<http://greatbritishpizzacompany.wordpress.com/>

The Lifeboat, Margate
 Photograph: Alamy 
This former wine bar is a pretty convincing recreation of a late-Victorian 
beer house (sawdust on the floor; four real ales gravity-dispensed from a rack 
of barrels), down to the refreshingly no-nonsense food menu. Weirdly, all the 
seafood was off on this visit, but elsewhere the Kentish-sourced menu includes 
savoury tarts, cheeses, sausages and a selection of puddings and pies. Served 
with a huge hillock of buttery mash and a dab of mustard and no veg, my pie 
meal (£5.50) was a very beige plate of food. But the soft shortcrust pastry 
yielded easily, and it was packed with chunks of moist, fibrous, falling-apart 
steak in a rich and well-rounded ale gravy. Washed down with a pint of 
Goachers' hoppy, refreshing Fine Light (£3), it hit the spot. The Lifeboat also 
has a sister venue in Broadstairs, the Chapel (44-46 Albion Street), which also 
offers good beer and simple, affordable food.
• Snacks £2.50-£3, meals £4.50-£8. 1 Market Street, Margate, 07837 024259, 
thelifeboat-margate.com <http://thelifeboat-margate.com/>

Fort's Cafe, Margate

Located on a shabby stretch of Margate seafront, this artsy, creative hang-out 
(The Cure playing at breakfast; vintage, mismatched Formica tables; a lone 
glitter ball for decoration) feels like a little slice of east London by the 
sea. If you're the sort of person who throws the word "hipster" around as an 
accusation, you're not going to like it. Which will leave the rest of us to 
appreciate a venue that – with top regional ingredients, sharp cooking, very 
keen prices – is a real find. From the breakfast menu, a large, doorstep of 
rarebit (£3.50, two for £4.50) was exemplary. The toasted sourdough had a real 
lactic twang, while the rarebit topping was a proper smooth, stout-loosened 
paste, with a powerfully spicy (extra mature) tang to it. Top that with an egg 
for a £1, and it's as good a breakfast as you'll eat. A flat white (£2) was a 
little thin, the milk hadn't been thoroughly textured, but at least it had been 
dosed correctly so that it actually tasted of coffee, not just hot milk. At 
lunch the menu expands to include burgers, smoked salmon and scrambled eggs, 
macaroni cheese and specials such as a warm scotch egg with an allotment salad 
or cider braised pigs' cheek on toast. Fort's is licensed and open into the 
evening on Friday and Saturday.
• Breakfast £2-£6.95, lunch £3.50-£7. 8 Cliff Terrace, Margate, 01843 449786, 
fortscafe.co.uk <http://fortscafe.co.uk/>

Caffe Alma, Margate

The space that Caffe Alma occupies - part of the groundfloor of Westcoast live 
music venue - may look a bit tired in the cold light of day, but there is 
plenty of va-va-voom to chef-owner Shanda Fernandes's cooking. The focus is on 
Iberian and South American dishes, ranging from typical Brazilian nibbles (the
coxinha – bread-crumbed, deep-fried "thighs" of shredded chicken – are 
beautiful, £1.60), to paella, piri-pirigambas, bacalhau pie and irregular 
specials, such as pork belly and bean stew, ormukeka, a rich, Brazilian seafood 
stew. I was there in the run up to the Margate Soul Weekend, when Caffe Alma 
was serving its specials at £5 a pop, which made my chicken salad an absolute 
bargain. It didn't necessarily look much, just grilled, shredded thigh and leg 
meat over leaves and tomato, but it tasted sensational. Clever marinating and 
dressing had given the juicy meat a wonderful salty, sharply fruity zing. Every 
mouthful was a double helix of flavour. I couldn't stop eating it. Which, when 
reviewing 12 or more places in 24 hours, is dangerous.
• Snacks, tapas and soups £1.50-£5.90, meals £7.90. 3-5 King Street, Margate, 
01843 447522;caffealma.com <http://www.caffealma.com/>

The Greedy Cow, Margate 

This compact takeaway and cafe, which has outdoor seating on Market Place, is 
Margate's go-to kitchen for "dirty" burgers and salt beef sandwiches. My hefty 
mound of pulled pork on a locally baked bun was a creditable version, moist 
with plenty of gelatinous fat in the mix. The BBQ sauce was sweet and zippy but 
not overpowering, and the homemade coleslaw on the side – good onion flavour, 
but really lifted by a little shaved fennel – was fantastic. Had I been staying 
in Margate for a few days, I would have definitely been back for the borderline 
sexist, but hugely appetising gents' burger (topped with bacon, black pudding, 
salt beef), hopefully followed by a Greedy Cow special, such as its salted 
caramel brownie or baked custard cream cheesecake.
• Breakfast £2.50-£5.50, sandwiches, burgers, etc £4-£7.50. 3 Market Place, 
Margate, 01843 447557,Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/thegreedycowdeli>

Caboose, Ramsgate

Cafe, bar, late-night music and comedy venue, Caboose is a local cultural hub, 
which also serves locally-sourced food at competitive prices, from breakfast 
eggs benedict through to afternoon salads and sandwiches. The menu then changes 
on Wednesday to Saturday evenings into a rather more expensive Mexican mix of 
quesadillas, burritos and fajitas. A homemade burger looked a bit underwhelming 
– a small-ish beef patty on half a ciabatta roll – but worked surprisingly 
well, bulked out into a big plate of food with fries and coleslaw . Properly 
seared, so that it had developed a good caramelised crust, the patty had been 
well-seasoned, not least with onion and possibly garlic, to give it depth, yet 
– and this is rarer than you'd think – its beefy flavour still shone through. 
All told, for £5.95, it was good value. If visiting you would be wise to 
check-out Caboose's regular offers (Wednesday's £7 burger-and-pint deal, for 
example), although you may be tempted off-piste by its compact selection of 
local ales (Wantsum Dynamo, Gadds' No.3) and international craft beers (from 
£3.20).

Just around the corner from Caboose, you will find what is commonly regarded 
as Ramsgate's best restaurant,Age & Sons <http://www.ageandsons.co.uk/>. 
Outside of Thursday's steak night (burger £6.50; rump cap £8.50), it is 
generally a shade too expensive for this series' £10-a-head price limit. 
However, it does serve a two-course vegetarian lunch for £9.95. This 
commemorates the founding of theVegetarian Society in Ramsgate in 1847 
<https://www.vegsoc.org/history>. Who knew? 
• Breakfast £2.50-£6, lunch £2.75-£6, evening mains £6.50-£9.95. 18 Queen's 
Street, Ramsgate, 01843 570984,caboosecafe.co.uk <http://www.caboosecafe.co.uk/>

Travel between Manchester and London was provided by Virgin Trains (
virgintrains.co.uk <http://www.virgintrains.co.uk/>). Accommodation in Margate 
was provided by the Walpole Bay Hotel (walpolebayhotel.co.uk 
<http://www.walpolebayhotel.co.uk/>, doubles from £85 B&B), an Edwardian 
property with many period features and a whole floor-cum-"living museum" packed 
with antiques, artefacts and ephemera. For more information, go to
visitkent.co.uk <http://www.visitkent.co.uk/> 
