
I will always be grateful to the person who described Testaccio – the part of 
Rome I call home – as being shaped like a large wedge of cheese. It’s true, 
with one side of the wedge provided by the straight via Marmorata, the other by 
the ancient city wall, with the river Tiber providing the deep curve between 
the two. The cheese would have to be pecorino romano, the creamy white, piquant 
sheep’s milk cheese so beloved in this city.

At first I lived in the heart of the wedge, next to the old market, then on 
the sharply cut side, and now I live on a street that runs parallel to the city 
wall and near the old slaughterhouse. In each of the three flats, I have been, 
more or less, above a family-run trattoria – there are dozens in this area – 
all of which feel like extensions of people’s homes, all of which serve up 
traditional food.

It is extremely traditional food. The fried antipasti and bruschetta; the 
thick minestre and classic Roman pastas; the rosemary-scented meat and offal 
dishes that were born in this the slaughterhouse district; the vegetables Rome 
is so rightly proud of, tangles of bitter chicory, crisppuntarelle, braised 
artichokes, courgettes like fluted coins cooked until unfashionably soft.

Many trattorias also offer daily specials, often following an informal, 
unscientific, weekly recipe calendar that has evolved over centuries, based 
partly on religious rules – eating fish on lean days, for example. Friday is 
the day for pasta and chickpeas or salt cod, Saturday for Roman-style tripe 
with mint and pecorino, Sunday for fettuccine with chicken livers and then 
roast lamb, Monday for rice and endive in broth, Tuesday for pasta and beans, 
Wednesday for whatever you fancy, and Thursday for gnocchi.

Giovedì Gnocchi (Gnocchi Thursday): music to many Romans’ ears, my 
four-year-old Roman at least (who also shakes his pinched fingers at my 
pronunciation). It is now my tradition, too. If we feel like going out for 
gnocchi, we walk across the piazza to Piatto Romano, a spare but comfortable 
place that serves up, good, tasty food with no fuss. We go often, know what to 
order, and the familiarity and comfort makes us blind to imperfections. On a 
Thursday at this time of year we are set in our ways: two artichokes, one 
fried, one braised, then two plates of gnocchi with whatever is offered: tomato 
sauce, pork-rib ragu, the sauce from the oxtail stew, and if they are on the 
menu, clams.

Gnocchi, meaning “little knots”, are small dumplings and can be made of 
breadcrumbs, ricotta, vegetables, rice flour, chestnuts, semolina, or in this 
case for Thursday’s gnocchi, potato. For every 300g of potato, you want up to 
150g of plain flour, which you add gradually, kneading and squeezing until you 
have a soft, consistent dough that feels lovely to handle. Practice is the best 
advice I have been given. Some, most notably for me the brilliantOretta Zanini 
de Vita <http://www.storiedicucina.it/>, suggest adding an egg, two even, which 
produces more robust gnocchi, which is reassuring for someone like me who has 
watched a few disintegrate in the pan.

Eggless gnocchi, though, are undoubtedly more tender: small potato pillows 
that bounce slightly in your mouth. I added an egg for years, until I finally 
plucked up the courage to go without. Eggless gnocchi need a steady, 
not-rollicking, boil, and to be scooped out of the pan the moment they bob to 
the surface. As for cooking the potatoes, some people bake them. I find boiling 
them whole then drying in a hot pan before peeling works a treat. If you turn 
out to be a gnocchi fan, you may want to invest in a potato ricer.

What to use as sauce? A simple tomato one 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/08/taian-tomato-sauce-recipe-how-to-cook-spaghetti-rachel-roddy>
 maybe, perhaps bolstered with some pancetta and pecorino for an amatriciana of 
sorts. Butter and sage is a simple but luxurious alternative: melt 50g of 
butter and then let some sage leaves sizzle in it.Anna del Conte 
<http://thehappyfoodie.co.uk/chefs/anna-del-conte>’s gorgonzola melted in cream 
with sage and lots of black pepper is a treat, as are clams as you would serve 
them with spaghetti alle vongole, meaning coaxed open in a hot pan with a 
little extra virgin olive oil and some chopped parsley. All gnocchi options are 
excellent on any day of the week, but especially on a Thursday.

Gnocchi di patate (potato gnocchi)

In Rome, the pasta course is called the primo and is modest, because something 
else is coming after, so this amount serves 4. We often have this alone, in 
which case it serves two adults and a child generously. If you double up, cook 
in two, even three batches.

Serves 4 as a starter
600g floury potatoes (eg russet)
salt
300g plain flour (you probably won’t need all of this) 
1- 2 eggs (optional)

1 Scrub but don’t peel the potatoes, boil them whole in salted water until 
tender. Drain, then put the empty pan back on a low heat until it is dry, add 
the potatoes and let them dry for a moment, too. Once the potatoes are cool 
enough to handle, peel them, then pass them through a potato ricer into a bowl, 
or mash them with a fork. You can also do this with the grating attachment of a 
food processor. If you are going to add an egg, do it now and mix well.

2 Turn the mixture out on to a floured work surface, add flour to the potato 
and work it in. Continue adding flour and kneading until you have a consistent 
dough that no longer sticks to your hands. The amount of flour will vary; the 
most important thing is the feel of the dough.

3 Dust the work surface with flour, pull off an egg-size lump, roll it into a 
2cm-thick rope, then cut the rope into 1cm pieces. At this point, if you want 
you can make the distinctive grooves with a gnocchi board or by pressing the 
gnocchi gently on a cheese grater or the back of a fork. Lay the gnocchi on a 
clean tea towel.

4 Bring a large pan of water to the boil, add salt, stir, then gather up the 
tea towel so as to gently drop all the gnocchi in at once. Once they bob to the 
surface, scoop them out with a slotted spoon. Have a warm serving plate and the 
sauce ready, so when the gnocchi are cooked, you put them straight on the 
plate, top with the sauce and serve.
