
An innovative, effective and low-cost system which replicates the 
pheromone-based communication of insect swarms in robots is now being made 
available to robotics and artificial intelligence researchers, after an 
important breakthrough atthe University of Lincoln 
<http://www.lincoln.ac.uk/home/> in the UK.

Swarm robotics is an emerging approach to the coordination of multi-robot 
systems, which takes inspiration from the natural world to examine the 
possibilities for improved interaction between robots and their surrounding 
environment.

In recent years research in this field has been important for advancing the 
biological study of insects, ants and other species known for their swarm 
behaviour. It has also contributed to the development of highly accurate 
vehicle collision sensors, surveillance technology and even aided video game 
programming.

Until now, researchers specialising in swarm robotic applications have been 
unable to replicate all the aspects of pheromone communication that occur in 
the natural world.

Scientists have employed both chemical means, using alcohol to simulate 
pheromones, and physical techniques, using light and sound, to try to 
accurately replicate pheromone-based communication, but none of these 
approaches have been completely effective.

Specialists from the University of Lincoln’s School of Computer Science have 
now produced a novel artificial pheromone system that is reliable, accurate and 
only uses off-the-shelf components.

Using an LCD screen and a low-cost USB camera, the system allows users to 
simulate several pheromones – displayed in the form of visual trails on the 
screen – and to change their strength to allow for controllable experiments. 
The visual “pheromone” image on the screen is sensed by two light sensors on 
the swarm robots, which replicate ants’ antennas.

The new system is called COS-phi (Communication System via Pheromone) and 
consists of a low-cost open-hardware micro robot and an open-source 
localisation system, which tracks the robots’ trajectories and releases the 
artificial pheromone.

Led by Farshad Arvin, PhD researcher in the School of Computer Science, the 
Lincoln team developed the system using their own Colias platform. They created 
Colias - an open-platform system that can be used to investigate collective 
behaviours and be applied to swarm applications - in 2014 in collaboration with 
experts from Tsinghua University in China.

Farshad said: “Nature is one of the best sources of inspiration for solutions 
to different problems in different domains, and this is why swarm robotics has 
developed into such an important area of study. It takes insights from the 
behaviours and coordination capabilities of social insects, where the success 
of a group in accomplishing a task relies heavily on the interactions among its 
members. Among social injects, the use of pheromones is one of the most 
effective means of communication, but for the swarm robotics community it has 
also been one of the most difficult to reproduce.

“That is why we are pleased to have devised an effective new system based on 
fast and precise visual localisation. It allows us to simulate a virtually 
unlimited number of different pheromones and showcases the results of their 
interactions as a gray-scale image on a horizontal LCD screen which the robots 
move on.

“The system means that we can produce precise and high resolution trails, 
control the diffusion, evaporation and density of the pheromones, and encode 
individual pheromones using different colours. COS-phi also simulates the 
interaction of different pheromones that can amplify or suppress each other, 
resulting in complex swarm behaviours, just as they do in the natural world.”

Using the COS-phi system, the researchers found that their micro robots were 
able to follow the leader, or pheromone distributor, without any explicit 
direction or communication.

The success of the system means that it can now be widely used in bio-inspired 
swarm robotic research projects, and it paves the way for further studies in 
this area. The team from Lincoln’s School of Computer Science will now 
investigate the influence of the rate of pheromone diffusion and evaporation on 
swarm performance and behaviour in more complex environments with obstacles.

Their original findings, published in the paper COS-phi: A novel artificial 
pheromone communication system for swarm robotic applications, were presented 
at the International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) 
conference in Hamburg.

 * Find out more about the University of Lincoln 
<http://www.lincoln.ac.uk/home/>
