
Mobile company Three is to introduce adblocking across its UK and Italian 
networks, making it the first major European operator to do so.

Three has struck a deal with Israeli company Shine that will see the mobile 
adblocking technology introduced in the UK and Italy, followed by a “rapid 
roll-out” across its operations in other countries.

The move is cause for serious concern for digital publishers and advertisers, 
which are already dealing with a rising number of people who block advertising 
when they use their phones.

Three said its move to implement network-wide adblocking is not an attempt to 
“eliminate” all mobile advertising, but to “give customers more control, choice 
and greater transparency over what they receive”.

The company, which has 9 million UK customers, said a network-wide adblocking 
strategy is better than relying on apps because it “reaches a broader range of 
mobile adblocking”.

“Irrelevant and excessive mobile ads annoy customers and affect their overall 
network experience,” said Three UK chief marketing officer Tom Malleschitz.

Malleschitz said that the company has three core reasons for introducing the 
technology.

 * Customers pay data charges so they should not then receive ads, costs which 
the company says advertisers should be made to pay.

 * Some advertising aims to elicit customer data and information without them 
knowing.

 * Customers should only receive relevant advertising and not have their 
mobile experience “degraded by excessive, intrusive, unwanted or irrelevant 
ads”.

“These goals will give customers choice and significantly improve their ad 
experience,” said Malleschitz. “We don’t believe customers should have to pay 
for data usage driven by mobile ads. The industry has to work together to give 
customers mobile ads they want and benefit from.”

Three said that it will now engage with the advertising community to “deliver 
a better, more targeted and more transparent mobile ad experience to customers”.

The Internet Advertising <http://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Bureau 
warned that Three’s move could result in publishers being forced to charge 
users for content they currently enjoy for free.

“The IAB believes that an ad funded internet is essential in providing revenue 
to publishers so they can continue to make their content, services and 
applications widely available at little, or no cost,” said Alex Kozloff, the 
IAB’s acting marketing and communications director. “We believe adblocking 
undermines this approach and could mean consumers have to pay for content they 
currently get for free.”
