
It was 1958. I was 20 years old and playing on the tennis circuit. I was good, 
or at least good for Greece, and it was a charmed life. I played in the 
Caribbean and along the Riviera, but my favourite tournament was in Barcelona. 
I liked the surface and played well there.

Tennis in those days was a lot like society. The top players would warm up 
with the “rabbits”, as they referred to us – like aristocrats talking to 
gamekeepers – while the middle-ranking players stuck to each other, like the 
middle classes. All the players were very friendly to each other – there was 
none of the modern crap with coaches and everyone sticking to their own teams 
all the time.

It was also very sociable. I had gone into tennis basically to meet girls. 
Most of the tournaments, apart from Wimbledon and the French Open, were played 
in country clubs. They were full of girls who would come along to watch you 
play, which was an opening to talk to them.

One night in Barcelona, the group of Spaniards we were with invited us out to 
the flamenco, and then someone asked if I wanted to be introduced toAva Gardner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/14/ava-gardner-screen-legend>. Of 
course I did. She was the most beautiful woman ever, and a top star. The 
nightclub was full of smoke. It was a scene straight out of a Hollywood movie. 
She was also a little drunk and I thought I might have a shot with her. She was 
in her late 30s and I was in my early 20s. Sadly she was there because she was 
having an affair withLuis Miguel Dominguín 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luis_Miguel_Domingu%C3%ADn>, the greatest 
bullfighter of all time, who was so good-looking. There was no chance for me.

She thought I was Spanish because I was dark and suntanned, and asked if I was 
a bullfighter.

“Matador?” she asked.

“No,” I replied.

“Banderillero?”

“No.”

“Picador?”

“No. Señora Gardner, yo soy jugador de tenis.”

“Puto?”

“Miss Gardner, just because I play tennis doesn’t mean I am gay.”

She laughed. She had asked it very politely. She was a good southern girl, and 
in Spain at that time tennis had a reputation as being quite a girly sport. 
When I got back to my group, they all laughed, too.

I never met her again. Of all the beautiful women and movie stars I have met, 
she stands out: friendly and flirty and so, so pretty.

The following year was The Dangerous Summer 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Dangerous-Summer-Ernest-Hemingway/dp/0684837897>, 
the bullfights that Hemingway covered forLife magazine. They were good days.

Many years later, in 1984, I was living in Cadogan Square in London and used 
to go running in Hyde Park. Ava lived in Ennismore Gardens at the time and I 
saw her walking her dog. But I didn’t want to go up to her. She was old and 
she looked pretty tired. I admired her so much. I didn’t want to bother her.
