
Anchovies are lovely fish – small, silvery and slender with green and blue 
reflections. They are related to herrings and sardines, and their flavour is 
reminiscent of both – more fragrant but with slight bitterness too. Anchovies 
are loved in Rome, and being plentiful in the warm Mediterranean, you will 
always find them on local fish stalls. My wilypescivendolo at Testaccio market 
gets his daily catch from a nearby coastal town called Anzio, their silver 
sides shining like newly minted coins against their bright white polystyrene 
packaging. There are usually some prepared anchovies on the counter too: 
headless, boneless fillets, opened up and looking a bit like fleshy butterflies 
ready to take home to be marinated, baked or fried.

Related: Our 10 best spring recipes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/20/10-best-spring-recipes> 

I was taught by my Sicilian family to coat the fillets in breadcrumbs before 
frying. Augusto at the trattoria La Torricella plunges them in cold water, then 
flour, then water again before dropping them in hot fat. Either way, they seize 
into crisp curls which need only a spritz of lemon and to be eaten as quickly 
as possible. I often meet Augusto at Mauro’s fish stall, negotiating that day’s 
fish for the trattoria until the vein in his throat throbs. If we go for lunch 
at La Torricella, there is a pretty good chance Mauro will be there eating 
lunch, which I imagine is all part of the throbbing deal.

Then there are preserved anchovies. On a Saturday not far from the fish 
stalls, a woman stands in front of a trolley just large enough to support an 
enormous, round tin of salted anchovies. Using tongs she picks out the number 
you want and wraps them in waxed paper for you to take home, rinse and debone. 
I like these salted ones, and hear the opinions about them being better, but I 
generally buy the olive oil-packed ones, the best I can afford, which is far 
from the most expensive as I depend on them so much as both an ingredient and 
essential seasoning.

I think anchovies with bread and butter is hard to beat. In Rome, this is 
calledpane, burro e alici and is well-loved. In one place I like, they serve 
them with toast, which means the butter melts and the anchovies are slightly 
warm. They also put tiny triangles of lemon on top. At anotherosteria you are 
given curls of butter – which taps a nostalgia funny-bone for me – with a few 
fillets fanned out and a pile of bread and you’re left to get on with it. Both 
ways are good, but there is something about sinking your teeth into a layer of 
cold butter that I find irresistible. At home, I often mash slightly softened 
butter with anchovy fillets to spread on bread or toast (which can be cut into 
soldiers and dipped in a soft boiled egg) or to toss with vegetables, 
especially sprouting broccoli, or spring greens. Butter and anchovy greens of 
all sorts are brilliant stirred into pasta.

As a seasoning, anchovies can steal the show in dressings and sauces, or they 
can play a more discreet role – anchovies used at the foundation of a dish 
disappear like an obedient manservant. Used carefully though, at the base of a 
soup or a stew, the aggressive fishiness is tempered into deep savouriness.

This is well illustrated with roast lamb, where a few fillets stuffed into 
incisions in the lamb melt and season it deeply and beautifully. Alongside the 
anchovy, stuff a sliver of garlic and a tuft of rosemary. A shoulder on the 
bone is ideal for this, which is almost impossible to find in Rome, as the 
lambs sold are so small. Fortunately, I have just spent the weekend in Dorset, 
where rain and sun played tag, and my mum had brought a shoulder of local lamb. 
It is important to stuff the trio deep inside, also to rub the joint with olive 
oil (some would say butter) and a little salt. Beside the tender lamb, we had a 
dish of potatoes and onions cooked in milk and a pile of something else I miss: 
bright green, peppery English watercress. It was a good, seasoned and 
celebratory meal before coming home to Rome.

Roast shoulder of lamb with anchovies, garlic and rosemary

Serves 4
1.5kg lamb shoulder
4 anchovy fillets in olive oil, drained
A couple of sprigs of rosemary (choose softer younger needles, if possible)
1 garlic clove
250ml dry white wine
Salt and black pepper

1 Set the oven to 220C/425F/gas mark 7. Peel and slice the garlic, then chop 
the anchovies in half. Use a small, sharp knife to trim away any excess fat and 
make 10 or so deep incisions in the lamb. Widen the incisions just enough to 
stuff half an anchovy, a slice of garlic and a small sprig of rosemary inside. 
Sprinkle with salt and plenty of pepper. Place the joint in a smallish roasting 
tin and roast for 30 minutes.

2 Turn the oven down to 160C/325F/gas mark 3, pour the wine in the bottom of 
the tin and roast for a further 90 minutes. Once cooked, cover with foil and 
rest for 20 minutes.

3 Lift the meat on to a board to carve. Use a wooden spoon to scrape any 
sticky bits into the gravy, then pour into a small pan. Put the gravy on a high 
heat to reduce slightly, then pour a little over each serving of lamb.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award
