
1 Reservists don’t get paid 

 Research from the army found almost half of people (46%) thought army reserve 
officers volunteered for free. The starting salary for officers in the reserve 
is £77.64 per day after commissioning, rising to £125.33 per day for majors. 
What’s more, they get a tax-free bonus of £300 when they join and a further 
£2,000 on completing training.

2 You have to give up all your spare time 

 The minimum commitment for the army reserve is just 19 days a year. With 
18-35 year olds spending an average ofalmost a full day each week 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/mediatechnologyandtelecoms/digital-media/11597743/Teenagers-spend-27-hours-a-week-online-how-internet-use-has-ballooned-in-the-last-decade.html>
 on social media and gaming, that’s a lot of spare time that could be put to 
better use training to travel the world and gain new skills in the army reserve.

 3 Reserve roles are all frontline fighting 

 There are hundreds of different jobs in the army reserve which aren’t combat 
focused, for example: neurosurgeons, dentists, photographers, teachers, 
linguists and musicians. The army will train you in management roles, for 
example in logistics and medical support, as well as training you to learn new 
skills.

4 Reservists aren’t as important as the regular army 

 The Ministry of Defence is committed to an army reserve of 30,000 by 2020, 
meaning that a quarter of all soldiers will be reservists. It is investing 
£1.2bn in funding in the army reserve, highlighting how essential reservists 
are to Britain’s national security.

5 They’re not as well trained 

 Reservists have access to the same training and same equipment as their 
regular counterparts. As a reserve officer, you’ll gain your commission at the 
prestigious Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, just as regular officers do, and 
you will routinely train with your paired regular unit. The army also pays for 
reservists to gain civilian qualifications while they work – from 
apprenticeships, literacy and numeracy skills up to A-level equivalent – which 
improve employability outside of the army in civilian life.

6 I’d never be fit enough 

 Fitness training in the army is progressive and you will receive world-class 
advice and support to get you army fit. You do not have to be a superhero, but 
you will need to be determined and pass baseline fitness assessments before you 
can start training. Why not give it a go? A good place to start would be to 
check out how you would get on by downloading the100% Army Fit app 
<http://www.army.mod.uk/join/Getting-yourself-ready.aspx>.


7 Your employer won’t let you take time off to serve in the reserves 

 Almost 1,000 employers, across all industries, have signed up to the armed 
forces covenant, which pledges support for employees who wish to serve their 
country in the army reserve. Chances are your employer is on the list – check 
it outhere <https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/armed-forces-covenant>. Many 
of these employers offer additional time off to serve with the reserves.

8 You don’t get to go abroad in the army reserve 

 Members of the army reserve are deployed overseas alongside the regular army, 
both for training deployments and on operations, offering humanitarian aid and 
peacekeeping. Currently, reservists are serving in about 80 countries around 
the world, including: Kenya, Cyprus, Germany, the Baltic region and Canada.

9 I’m too old to join 

Anyone under 50 can join the army reservebut the maximum joining age for some 
specialist roles is 52. Check outwww.army.mod/jobs <http://www.army.mod/jobs> 
for more information.

10 It’s not for me 

 The army reserve is always recruiting, and there is a job for everyone. No 
matter what your skills, interests or background, there is a job for you in the 
army reserve.
