
Talks that will shape the global agenda on social, economic and environmental 
development for at least the next 15 years got under way with world leaders in 
New York on Wednesday.

On the first day of the UN debate, the president of the general assembly, Sam 
Kutesa, called on member states to work tirelessly over the next 12 months to 
agree “a truly transformative agenda” in a new set of development goals that 
will improve the lives of all people. “We carry the expectations of millions 
and millions of people, but there are many issues and challenges that require 
our attention and effort in this session,” he said.

The new global targets will replace the millennium development goals (MDGs), 
which reach their deadline at the end of next year.

Almost 1 billion people still live in poverty, hundreds of thousands of women 
die each year during pregnancy and childbirth, he said, and while school 
enrolment has gone up, the quality of teaching is poor in many countries. 
Kutesa said more effort was needed to empower women, and that he would be 
convening a high-level debate on this issue in February.

Rising youth unemployment and increasing armed conflict needed to be addressed 
in the next set of goals. “We call on member states to redouble their efforts,” 
he said.

In her address to the assembly, the Brazilian president, Dilma Rousseff, said: 
“It will be crucial for us to identify means of implementation that correspond 
to the magnitude of the challenges we have committed to overcome. We must be 
ambitious when it comes to financing, cooperation, national capacity building 
and technology transfer, especially towards least developed countries.”

A draft set of 17 sustainable development goals (SDGs), with 169 targets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/sep/24/gathering-data-sustainable-development-crippling>
, will form the basis of intergovernmental discussions over the next year. The 
draft, compiled by aUN-appointed working group 
<http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/owg.html> that comprised 70 countries, 
was presented to the general assembly this month.

The proposed 17 goals cover the broad themes of the MDGs – ending poverty and 
hunger, and improving health, education and gender equality – but also include 
specific goals to reduce inequality, make cities safe, address climate change 
and promote peaceful societies.

It is hoped that the goals will encourage a more holistic approach to 
development at national and international level, and offer a chance for more 
partnerships and collaboration.

Crucially, the next set of goals will be universal, which means all countries 
will be required to consider them when crafting their national policies. 
Officially, the eight MDGs were applicable to all but they have been marketed 
as anti-poverty goals for poor countries that are funded by wealthy nations.

There have been grumbles that 17 goals are too many, but it is understood that 
the number is unlikely to be reduced. Instead, the number of targets may be 
trimmed.

Speaking at a side event at the UN on Wednesday, David Cameron called for not 
more than 12 goals, preferably 10. “I appreciate the work of the open working 
group, and how difficult it is to deal with competing demands, but frankly … I 
don’t believe they will cut it at 17. There are too many to communicate 
effectively,” he said. “There’s a real danger they will end up sitting on a 
bookshelf, gathering dust.”

The UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, is due to publish a report in November 
that will pull in comments from leaders during the generally assembly, plus 
other consultations that have taken place. The report will set the tone for 
intergovernmental discussions on the SDGs. Two officials will be appointed to 
create the programme for government debate next year.

The final set of goals are due to be presented at a special session of the 
general assembly next September. Implementation is expected in 2016.

Amina Mohammed, the UN secretary general’s special adviser on post-2015 
development planning, said the next 12 months will the last mile of a long and 
difficult road to find consensus on what makes the final cut of the SDGs.

“There’s lots of pressure. People have fought very hard for these [17 goals] 
and they don’t want them touched, but we don’t want to fall into the trap of 
being too prescriptive. We’ve got to have conversations that will continue to 
shape up the goals, get more clarity, more commitments that reflect local 
reality,” she told the Guardian. “It will take a lot of leadership, and courage 
will be required to take the body blows for this.”
 Amina Mohammed, special adviser of the UN secretary general on post-2015 
development planning, said: ‘It will take a lot of leadership, and courage will 
be required’ to achieve the sustainable development goals. Photograph: 
Jean-Marc Ferré/UN Photo 
Mohammed, who was previously the senior special assistant to the Nigerian 
president on the MDGs, said it was not about the number of goals or indicators, 
it was more about ensuring their key elements touched on the reality of life on 
the ground and could be translated at national level.

“We need to ask what are countries’ realities. I go back [home] to Ebola and 
Boko Haram … that’s my reality,” she said. “These goals are only as good as 
delivery, and delivery is part of a political agenda.”

She said it was important that governments didn’t cherrypick some of the 
goals, but that they were integrated as a whole. To do this, the SDGs needed to 
resonate with leaders. Their success, she added, would not be judged on the 
economic growth of a country, but on the difference they have made in people’s 
lives . “We want actionable targets, not those that remain aspirational,” 
Mohammed said.

The UN is also going through a period of soul-searching about whether its 
institutions are “fit for purpose” in a post-2015 world, and the role its 
agencies will play in supporting the process.

How to pay for the ambitious post-2015 agenda is a key task ahead. “Funding is 
crucial for credibility on climate and post-2015 efforts,” Ban told the 
meeting. He said all public, private, domestic and international funding 
sources needed to be tapped.

A committee of experts on sustainable development financing 
<http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.php?menu=1558>, set up last year, 
presented their recommendations last month. The committee said public financing 
and donor aid will be central to support the implementation of the SDGs, but 
that money generated from the private sector, through tax reforms, and through 
a crackdown on illicit financial flows and corruption were vital.

The committee report is expected to stimulate debate in the lead-up to a major 
conference on financing for development in Addis Ababa in July 2015.
