
David Cameron has insisted his campaign for Britain to remain in the European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> has been “hugely optimistic and 
positive”, after the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, said the remain camp’s 
“threats” could persuade the public to “put two fingers up to the political 
class”.

Speaking on the BBC1’s the Andrew Marr Show on Sunday, Farage said there had 
been a shift in the past fortnight as the public tired of dire warnings about 
the risks of voting to leave the EU on 23 June.

“People are fed up of being threatened by David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>. People are beginning to put 
two fingers up to the political class,” he said.

The prime minister, also appearing on the programme, defended the remain 
campaign’s approach of highlighting the economic risks of leaving. “If we vote 
to come out, we are putting ourselves deliberately in a less good economic 
position in our absolute key market,” he said.

Recent polls have suggested many voters have failed to grasp the central 
message of the remain campaign, that leaving would crash the economy, costing 
jobs and lowering living standards.Just a quarter surveyed by Ipsos Mori 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/brexit-living-standards-uk-ipsos-mori>
 said they thought Brexit would make them personally worse off.

But asked whether the government had got the tone wrong by pounding the public 
with statistics, Cameron said: “I totally accept that people are confused by 
having so many statistics and there is a lot of frustration because of that; 
but I think it’s actually my job as prime minister, when you’ve got these 
warnings coming from the governor of the Bank of England, from the 
International Monetary Fund, it’s my responsibility to talk about them.”

He added: “I think it’s a hugely optimistic and positive campaign.”

Farage shrugged off the economic risks of leaving. Asked about the idea that 
the value of the pound could plunge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/11/eu-vote-remain-leave-sterling-markets>
 on foreign exchange markets, he said: “So what? Even if sterling were to fall 
a few percentage points, so be it: we have a floating currency, and it would be 
good for exports.”

With the result on 23 June looking very close, senior figures in the remain 
campaign have turned to trying to discredit the leaders of the leave campaign, 
including Boris Johnson – with the energy secretary, Amber Rudd, describing him 
in a television debate last week as “the life and soul of the party but not the 
man you want to drive you home”.


However, Cameron stressed he had taken a “self-denying ordnance” not to talk 
about personalities. “I’m simply going to talk about the arguments, the facts, 
the case as I see i,” he added.

Many at Westminster believe the prime minister would immediately face a 
leadership challenge if Britain voted to leave the EU; but he said he would 
stay on to negotiate Britain’s exit.

“If we vote to leave, will we carry out that instruction, yes; will I continue 
as PM; yes; will I construct a government that includes all the talents of the 
Conservative party, yes I would.”

He also batted away the idea, repeatedly highlighted by Vote Leave, that 
Turkey will join the EU, opening up the possibility of mass migration. “There 
is no prospect of Turkey joining the EU for decades,” Cameron said. “At the 
current rate of progress, they’ll get there in the year 3000. It’s a complete 
red herring and the leave campaign knows that.”
