
The leader of the Commons, Andrew Lansley 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, is blocking a debate on 
whether to make MPs accountable to the parliamentary standards committee for 
exceptional wrongdoing in their "private and personal lives", triggering a 
clash with the commissioner responsible for overseeing MPs' standards.

Lansley has argued there is no point debating the proposals, recommended in a 
report by the Commons standards and privileges committee more than 18 months 
ago, because MPs have previously vetoed the idea of being investigated over 
anything to do with their personal lives – even if the wrongdoing could bring 
parliament into disrepute.

If the proposals went ahead it could have allowed the committee to hold an 
inquiry into the sexual misconduct of suspended Lib Dem MP Mike Hancock.

Lansley's refusal to allow a debate on the report, first published in December 
2012, has caused Kathryn Hudson, the independent commissioner on standards, to 
express "grave concern" in her annual review published on Monday.

"It is extremely disappointing that time has not been found for such a debate, 
not least because the new rules are considerably clearer on certain issues, 
including some which have been the subject of inquiries this year," she said.

"If there is disagreement with some of the Committee's proposals, MPs would be 
free to amend them in debate and leadership may be shown by addressing issues 
transparently and honestly, rather than by avoiding difficult discussions. In 
my first annual report I expressed my disappointment that the House had not 
found time to consider the changes. Another full year has now passed without 
such a debate and decision on the rules."

Kevin Barron, a Labour MP and chairman of the standards committee, said he 
fully endorsed the commissioner's concerns about the need for a debate.

Some members of the Commons standards committee have privately expressed 
disquiet that they were not able to accept an investigation into Hancock, the 
suspended Liberal Democrat MP who has now apologised for sexually inappropriate 
behaviour towards a vulnerable constituent with mental health problems.

The complainant has said her accusations were ignored by the Lib Dems and 
parliamentary authorities, forcing her to take legal action in order to gain 
redress.

Following the trial of Nigel Evans, who was cleared of rape and sexual 
assault, there have also been concerns that people can only take allegations 
about inappropriate personal behaviour by MPs to police or the whips, who have 
long been accused of trying to brush claims that could damage their party under 
the carpet.

The Commons will on Monday debate a new grievance procedure for Palace of 
Westminster staff to take action over bullying or harassment by MPs, but this 
will not cover their own researchers and secretarial teams, who are directly 
employed by them.

Speaking to a new parliamentary inquiry on MP ethics, Lansley said MPs have 
already voted against being held accountable for actions in their private and 
personal life in March 2012 and there was no need to revisit the issue.

"An amendment was passed that precluded certain investigations," he said. "The 
issue was, in effect, within what I would regard as the same time frame – 
certainly within the same parliament, with effectively the same members being 
asked to have the same debate on the same issue, with an expectation of a 
different result … The house was not in any position – I wasn't in a position – 
to expect a different result.

"In terms of allocating time, it is not my objective to allocate time for a 
debate that, in itself, does not move the position forward."

Asked about concerns that some MPs were getting through a lot of staff and did 
not know how to treat them properly, Lansley resisted the idea of a compulsory 
induction programme.

"The idea that you can make things compulsory is inherently difficult with 
members of parliament, because although they are subject to the whip, beyond 
that they are strictly speaking completely free to determine their own 
responsibility," he said.

Angela Eagle, his Labour shadow, also warned there was little point reviving 
the issue of holding MPs accountable for "personal and private" actions, saying 
it had "caused a lot of worry for many, many members, which is why that 
amendment to the suggestions was made".

"Should that come back to the house, you would get the same result unless much 
more work was done to try to reassure members that this is not overly intrusive 
into their purely private lives. I think even MPs are probably, under human 
rights law, allowed at least a tiny bit of private life. There are worries 
among members about what that might mean in the kind of context within which we 
all operate."

The inquiry into reforms of the MP standards regime by a parliamentary 
subcommittee was set up in the wake of the scandal over former culture 
secretary Maria Miller's mortgage expenses. This saw theindependent 
investigator's conclusions that she should repay £45,000 watered down 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/apr/03/culture-secretary-maria-miller-ordered-apologise-mortgage-expenses>
by the Commons standards committee of 10 MPs and three lay members, who said 
she should repay just £5,800.

After that, David Cameron conceded that there might be a case for reforms to 
the system to combat the public perception that MPs were still policing 
themselves.

Under the current system, an independent commissioner investigates complaints 
and makes recommendations to the standards committee, which draws conclusions 
and recommends sanctions. This is then brought before theHouse of Commons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> for approval.

Lansley said he thought there should be an equal balance of MPs and lay 
members on the standards committee.

He also said it could be written into guidance that these lay members 
effectively have a "veto" on any report by the MPs with which they disagree, as 
they can express a contrary opinion.

However, he said it would not be right to give these lay members any actual 
voting rights, meaning MPs would still have the final say on whether to 
recommend sanctions on their colleague under investigation.

Unelected people could not be allowed to "reach into" parliament and overrule 
its authority as that would contravene the principle of privilege, he said.

"The House has privilege and we cannot have other people simply reaching into 
the House of Commons and upsetting that," he said.

Instead, Lansley proposed that he could, as leader of the Commons, bring 
forward the opinion of the lay members to parliament. Lay members have never 
yet disagreed with the MPs on the standards committee about a decision.
