
So you heard the big news? You didn’t? If you check in regularly it’s all in 
Maisie’s video diary. Though we did tweet it – no? So, OK, she found her thumb! 
Put it properly into her mouth! At 11 weeks and four days! It’s meant to be a 
huge indicator of intelligence, not that it matters of course. Well actually it 
is quite a big deal, because now she can self-soothe, and thank God we’d just 
set up the infrared cameras in her room, because if we’d missed it I don’t 
think I could have forgiven myself.

Like, we missed her first projectile vomit – awful, she went off camera, and 
sod’s law neither of us was wearing the GoPro, just thinking about it makes me 
tear up a bit, she vomited, really brilliantly, this absolutely gorgeous stream 
of sick, and nobody except us will ever see it. I photographed the vomit 
though, all over her mother hahaha, look… and you must see this, you caught my 
post about her incredible poo? Not that one, the one that literally exploded 
out of her nappy? Pity, it got 28 likes, whole day to clear up, apparently. 
Here, is that not the most awesome thing, ever? I’m Instagramming Maisie’s poo 
every day, for a record – no, just in the nappy, though we have frozen a few 
samples, for when they invent sensory videos. See this one’s a landmark, when 
her poo goes from being kind of mustardy, to darker? That’s my girl! Man, I 
don’t think I’ve been so proud of anything since we floated the company, and 
with the remote set up I can even zoom in on her pooing face, then update 
everybody from work.

Related: Modern tribes: the zero-waste warrior 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/06/modern-tribes-zero-waste-warrior>

The weird thing is, why mothers haven’t always done this? Just thinking of all 
the tiny kids who’ll grow up not knowing how their face looked when they pooed 
makes me feel a bit emotional, sorry. Things they never tell you about 
fatherhood – the smallest things set you off, and don’t even talk about the 
anxiety. Like, when she says her first word – if she doesn’t speak up, how the 
hell do I make that into a ringtone?
