
For those of us who don’t make the grades we were hoping for on A-level 
results day, it can be hard to see a way forward. Advice can be hard to come 
by, and giving up may seem like the only option.

Here ten people share their experiences of getting less-than-desirable exam 
results, and how they carved a way forward.

‘The people who do well in life are those who can take a knock and learn from 
it’ - Richard, 32


I needed something like ABB in maths, physics and chemistry to get onto my 
preferred course in Civil Engineering at Liverpool University. Needless to say, 
I didn’t achieve anywhere near that. And I can’t say I was surprised. The worst 
part was opening my results and seeing the results spell out the word end! 
Having to walk into school, read that and walk straight back out when all my 
bright, hard working friends are celebrating in front of you is not the best 
feeling in earth.

I’m currently working in Hong Kong as an engineering design manager on one of 
the most high profile infrastructure projects. I don’t exactly sing my exam 
results from the rooftops as I’m not sure I want colleagues to know that I 
don’t have a maths A-level!

On results day, I immediately went home to call Clearing. I’m not sure that I 
was particularly panicked at that point as I had done no work or revision so 
there was no big shock. It was more that I felt shame in front of my parents. 
Luckily there was a foundation course at Liverpool university and run by Carmel 
college. What it did offer was the chance to move away from home that year, 
which I desperately needed.

Related: Take it from an examiner, your students’ A-level results could easily 
be wrong 
<http://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/aug/13/a-levels-gcses-examiner-exam-results-wrong>

I’m not sure that failing my exams was a positive experience but it’s simply a 
fact that I was not mature enough at that point to put in the amount of work 
and discipline that was needed to gain those qualifications. I was simply not 
ready.

However, having been given further opportunities to study through sponsorship 
from later employers I now have a bachelors in Civil Engineering, an MSc in 
structural engineering and am Chartered with the Ice. So although that day 
isn’t my proudest moment, it hasn’t actually held me back and was a big life 
lesson.

Don’t let dark thoughts keep rolling in about ruined careers as life is about 
rolling with the punches and coming out the other side. The people who do well 
in life are those who can take a knock and learn from it. There will be lots of 
things happen in your life that may require a change of plan, you just need to 
keep your head up and when one door closes, go pick another. Some people aren’t 
academic but they excel when they enter the work place.

‘My life would’ve been very dull and basic if I’d got those three Bs’ - 
Carrie, 28
 ‘There is a reason for everything and a huge adventure await’ Photograph: 
Carrie 
I thought that was it. This was the end of the world. I saw all my friends 
celebrate their success, and I couldn’t join in. My dreams of studying English 
at Glasgow University had been taken away from me. I had worked so hard, and 
for nothing. I had planned an entire life for myself in Glasgow, I was going to 
escape London and grow up.

The worst thing is that I had obsessed over Glasgow University for so long. 
Perhaps I focused too much on the fact that I could somehow change my life by 
running away to a big Scottish city. I wanted new friends, I wanted to be 
intellectually stimulated. It was all taken away from me.

I wasn’t interested in my other university choices, or dragging myself through 
clearing. I decided to take a gap year. I worked in a West End theatre and that 
changed my life.

I was soon hanging out with actors, writers, artists, designers, directors, 
other creative people, all utterly mad and inspirational. I instead applied to 
do an Art Foundation at Camberwell College of Art. I got in! During the course, 
I realised I had a knack for costume design, something I wouldn’t have chosen 
unless I had been immersed in the theatrical world.

I then appled to Wimbledon College of Art for their famous Theatre Design 
degree. I spent the next three years making theatre, making friends for life, 
having love affairs, learning and devouring everything I could. However, the 
desire to write never quite left me.

Related: I failed all of my A-levels. But it turned out that it wasn’t the end 
| Anne Perkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/13/failed-all-a-levels-wasnt-end>

After four years in theatre, I applied to the University of Oxford for their 
diploma in Creative Writing. I applied and got in despite my bad grades. They 
accepted me based on my talent. I couldn’t be the writer I am today, if at 
eighteen I had started university.

I think my life would’ve been very dull, ordinary and basic if I’d actually 
got those three Bs at A-Level. I went on a mad, wild journey, taking an unusual 
route. I am a completely different person, I have self-confidence, and am proud 
of how far I have come.

It’s so young to decide your degree at seventeen! How on earth are you 
supposed to decide from the wealth of world out there? You might not have even 
had your first kiss!
There’s so much pressure on teenagers, too much pressure. On one hand they’re 
being told they’re stupid, then when they get exceptional grades, the exams are 
too easy.
It isn’t the end of the world. It will be okay if you want it to be. Get off 
your arse, and sort it out. It will only be okay – maybe even bloody amazing – 
if you make it work for you. If you didnt get the grades you want, figure out 
the next step and go on from there. There is a reason for everything and a huge 
adventure awaits.

‘It’s not over until you give up trying’ - Sarraa, 22
 ‘Even if all of your friends get into their courses this year, they won’t all 
graduate at the same time so the age that you start university won’t even 
matter’ Photograph: Sarraa 
I wanted to study veterinary medicine, but I had no offers and A*,B,C,D grades 
with the latter two – the sciences – being the more important. I refused to let 
my A-Level grades bring me down. It’s important to have a sense of optimism on 
results day.

It may seem like all is lost in the heat of the moment, but I think that 
keeping a clear head and considering other options might lead you to better 
opportunities. This may be an overused cliché, but I thoroughly believe that 
when one door closes, another one opens.

I was accepted onto a bioveterinary science degree through clearing which I 
have just graduated from, having achieved a 2:1. In my final year I applied for 
a veterinary medicine degree and my degree allowed me to secure an offer.

Related: A-level results 2015: gender gap, pass rates and subject popularity – 
in charts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/datablog/2015/aug/13/a-level-results-2015-gender-gap-pass-rates-subject-popularity-charts>

If you don’t get into the course you want and a second degree is too difficult 
for you to finance, then take a gap year. Re-sit whatever exams you need to and 
get as much work experience as you can. Trust me when I say that you won’t lose 
out on the university experience at all! Even if all of your friends get into 
their courses this year, they won’t all graduate at the same time so the age 
that you start university won’t even matter.

I feel like I can disregard my results now as they clearly do not define me or 
my abilities. I now know that A levels are not the be all and end all that they 
are made out to be. If you are determined enough and work hard, even after 
making mistakes, then you will reap the rewards.

I am now about to embark on the degree of my dreams, despite having A-level 
grades which were considered unacceptable at the time. It’s not over until you 
give up trying. Good luck!

 ‘Be prepared to take a more interesting path’ - Mark, 32

I was pretty gutted. I hadn’t expected to do brilliantly, but I got two E’s 
and a non-graded which ruled out any of the computing courses I was interested 
in. I knew I wanted to go to university but I had no idea how I was ever going 
to get there and there didn’t seem to be much advice available.

I enrolled at a higher education college to re-sit one of my A-Levels and take 
one new one, and did well enough to get into an access course at university. 
From there I went on to get a BSc Hons in Computer Science. Fast-forward a few 
years and I’m now a lead software tester in one of Cambridge’s successful 
start-ups with another MSc under my belt.

I’m mostly annoyed at the way I was taught at school. I wasn’t taught things 
because they were interesting, or useful or just plain fun; I was taught things 
because these were the three main points I needed to put across on the exam in 
order to get a good grade.

For me it’s helped me to put candidates’ formal education, or lack thereof, 
into perspective when I’m hiring for a position. Experience and attitude have 
proven to be far more valuable qualities.

Exams <http://www.theguardian.com/education/exams> are only a stepping stone, 
and there are plenty of others available. Focus more on where you want to go 
with your life and be prepared to take a more interesting path to get there, 
it’ll help you stand out when recruiters are looking through a near identical 
stack of CV’s.

‘It made me think about who I am and what I want to get out of my life’ - 
Jodie, 26


When people tell you that it’s not the end of the world, it really isn’t! Yes 
it may change your career path, but you can still get there! You may have to 
take another route or resit, but you will get there. Never give up!

I really struggled in the transition to A Levels and during my A2 year, I 
became really anxious, suffered insomnia and lost a fair bit of weight. My 
symptoms were related to depression, but as I knew my feelings were related to 
the pressure of my A2 exams, I knew once they were over that would be too.

I was often put down by teachers saying that I would be lucky to achieve any 
GCSEs. I went on to get 5 GCSEs and was extremely disappointed, especially when 
comparing myself to peers.

The worst part was in 2007 when I bottled under the pressure. I did however, 
make sure that I attended all my exams regardless of the result.
I didn’t achieve my first choice university and that was a really difficult 
day. All my friends had achieved their first choice and I just felt really 
disappointed in myself. It was then I decided to resit my A2 year at a college, 
instead of sixth form, and reapply for the following year – I just simply 
wasn’t ready.

In August 2008 I achieved my first choice University to study Psychology. I 
achieved a 2:1 and proved those around me wrong, but more importantly, I proved 
to myself that I could do it and that I did have the academic capability; I 
just had to work a lot harder than some of my friends for it.

In 2011, I started an MSc in Abnormal and Clinical Psychology. Something I 
never would have thought possible a few years before.

Looking back, I feel it was a positive experience as I realised that it’s 
important to do it for yourself and not to compare to others. I guess it made 
me think about who I am and what I want to get out of my life.

‘Nothing is set in stone and the path you choose is neither right nor wrong, 
it just is’ - Eliot, 22
 ‘Failing your A-levels is not the end of the world - for me it was the 
beginning’ Photograph: Eliot 
I have to be honest and say I had given up on my A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> before I had even taken them. 
Even so, to find out I had done so badly left a hollow feeling of 
disappointment. I could not even face turning up at school one last time to 
pick them up.

The worst part was seeing my friends being so happy with their results and 
becoming increasingly excited to go away for university.

When I look back at it I realise how important these setbacks were. They made 
me realise the importance of a good education and led me to opt for a return to 
learning. Having recently completed an Access to HE Diploma, I am now 
fulfilling my second chance and will be going to uni next month. The fantastic 
teachers at City and Islington College serve as an example that second chances 
exist! I do not believe I would be in the position I am today had it not been 
for them believing in me and allowing me, as one told me, “to embrace my 
intellect”. I am now going on to study history and politics at the University 
of Liverpool.


I know that had I gone on to university at 18 my life would be completely 
different, but to be honest I am quite happy with my life as it is. Though 
still a blemish on my record, when I compare them with my recent grades it 
reveals just how much I have grown since then.

It’s often easier to blame yourself for missed opportunities and wonder, or 
even wish, for what could have been. However, nothing is set in stone and the 
path you choose is neither right nor wrong, it just is. Had I not flopped my 
A-levels, who would I be today? How would I think? Would I know the great 
friends I have met since? Whatever happens life goes on, you continue to exist 
and there are always going to be opportunities to improve yourself whether in 
or out of education.

Failing your A Levels is not the end of the world, for me it was the beginning.

 ‘There is always another path’ - Ross, 24

I just barely passed a couple of A levels. I was going through a weird phase 
back then, I guess it was some form of depression. I became lazy and stopped 
caring about a lot of things. My A levels were one of them.

After a few days of constant searching for solutions to avoid working full 
time I ended up finding a university who’d take me. Particularly due to great 
references from various teachers who knew me.

All the scare stories you’re told by the teachers and random adults who want 
you to do well, they start to haunt you. “You’ll end up working in retail all 
your life” or “you’ll never be rich” or “you’ll never do what you want to do” 
or “you’ll struggle and you won’t be happy” – this is what you end up telling 
yourself, you begin to think you’ve not just failed at your grades but you’ve 
failed at life. I felt terrible when I saw I had bad grades from college, the 
worst part is the fear and panic you get hours after seeing your final grades.

I went to university, I kept my head down when I needed to, did the work and 
came out on top. It became a positive experience for me because it taught me 
that I’m not really a defeatist, I’ll keep fighting to get what I want to make 
me happy.

You haven’t lost. You haven’t failed yourself. Just find another path to where 
you want to be in the future. There is always another path. Seriously, no one 
gives a shit about your grades apart from universities and colleges, if they 
can see you’re a competent person and a hard worker.

I’m now a professional video-editor who has worked for multiple media 
companies within the past 3 years. And I’m also a film and English teacher.

‘Full-time study is not the only thing you can do’ - Sanchia, 23


I had a sinking feeling in my stomach as I came out of my last A-level exam 
with the suspicion that I’d spectacularly missed out on the grade I needed. I 
didn’t even bother waking up early to check my grades on results day and when I 
opened the envelope I wasn’t surprised, just at a loss for what I was going to 
do.

I had a conditional offer to study at the University of Cambridge, which I 
didn’t get the final grades for, but the worst part was that I didn’t get the 
grades for my second choice university either. So there I was, with four A* and 
an A grade, and no university place. I was so proud of myself for achieving 
such great results, but people kept coming up to me and telling me how sorry 
they were. I wasn’t sorry at all, I had honestly and truthfully given my all in 
those exams, and my grades were good!

I called around and found a clearing place at Royal Holloway, but I knew 
nothing about the university and my heart wasn’t in it, it was just a last 
ditch attempt to do what I thought I should be doing, instead of what was right 
for me at that time.

I rejected the clearing place, found a full-time entry level job at a 
secondary school, moved to a new city and started over. After a year of getting 
some incredible work experience, I re-applied to different universities this 
time and for a slightly different course. The benefit of working full-time for 
that year in between was getting the clarity I needed, in order to know exactly 
what course I actually wanted to study and what career I might be suited to.

It was the best thing that ever happened to me! It led to personal and 
professional opportunities that I never would have had if I had gone straight 
from school to university. It also taught me how to cope with disappointment 
and ‘failure’, which a surprising number of university students don’t seem to 
know how to do.

If you don’t think you did your best, you always have the option to re-take a 
few subjects. If you really gave it your all, think about wider options. 
Full-time study is not the only thing you can do. Why not get a job or some 
volunteer experience in a field that interests you? Your options are limitless 
and as long as you work hard and commit yourself, you will gain something 
valuable from the experience.

‘There are plenty of avenues still open to you, you just have to be willing to 
look for them’ - Maria, 23

I was heartbroken. I had never had any trouble academically and I genuinely 
thought I had done well. My result left me feeling like an utter failure, and 
due to the poor result, I couldn’t even pursue the career I wanted to prior to 
results day.

I felt like I had disappointed my parents. I had wanted to pursue a career in 
medicine but that was no longer a possibility with my grades. The worst part 
was the loss of motivation I had to get to my end goal. My self esteem took a 
massive hit.

I worked to get my grades up, but while I managed to do really well in 
biology, I only managed a grade C at both chemistry and physics in my A-levels. 
I then chose to pursue a degree in biomedical sciences at university. After 
graduating university with a decent 2:1 I successfully applied for medicine, 
however, through work experiences and personal experiences, found that it 
wasn’t for me and I’m now pursuing a career in teaching secondary school 
science.

Prior to this experience, I truly believed that failing academically would be 
the end of the world for me, however, life goes on and dreams and goals evolve. 
I felt as though I had been let down partly by the schooling system and so I 
decided I would join its ranks in order to help students like me.

It helped shape into the person I am today. It was also a lesson in 
perseverance, I didn’t let one bad experience take me down and out unlike so 
many others I know. I feel like a grew into a stronger person because of it.

It can happen to the best of us. Don’t let it keep you down for long, like 
many things in life, you just have to take it in your stride and make the best 
of a bad situation. There are plenty of avenues still open to you, you just 
have to be willing to look for them. The old adage stands correct; if at first 
you don’t succeed, try and try again.

‘Most problems are temporary’ - Tilly, 32

Having done well at GCSE I got D,D,E in my A-levels. Without wishing to make 
excuses my family had been through quite a traumatic time and I found the whole 
situation quite difficult to cope with. For a wannabe scientist this was a 
disaster.

I didn’t have the same access to parental support as a lot of my friends so I 
also felt very alone. If I was going to get out of this in one piece I knew it 
would have to be off my own back. For an 18 year old that can be quite a 
daunting thing.

I was very lucky enough that my mitigating circumstances were accepted by the 
university I applied to and they let me in despite my terrible grades. I worked 
really hard and eventually came out with a 2:1. I then went out to work for a 
few years in my chosen sector and returned to university on a fully funded PhD 
place about 5 years after I originally finished my undergraduate degree. I 
completed my PhD in 3 years. It has been hard work but absolutely worth it.

It taught me a lot about needing to be self sufficient and take responsibility 
for my own mistakes. In trying circumstances you can learn a lot about yourself 
and your strengths. It also helped me to learn that, even if things aren’t 
going your way right now, you should not give up. Most problems are temporary, 
you just have to find your way through them as best you can.

Bad results are not the end of the world, although it may seem that way at the 
time. No one bothers asking my A-level results anymore! Work experience and 
other life skills can be viewed as just as important as academic 
qualifications. My advice is keep at it, work hard, you will get there 
eventually.



