
Q I have just joined a new company. I've been told the Christmas party is a 
very posh affair. I'm naturally a little over the top - I love sequins and 
sparkles - but I'd like to look chic for the party. It's my chance to make a 
good impression in my new office.
Hazel

A I would ditch the sequins. At the right party it's fine to look like you've 
borrowed a dress from Dame Shirley Bassey's wardrobe, but it's too easy to 
stray into Pat Butcher territory. Don't worry about feeling drab: embellishment 
is a big trend this season, and there are heaps of jewelled, studded and 
crystal detailing on this year's party frocks. There are shimmering hemlines 
and arm holes, or extravagant clusters of jewels on necklines, as seen at 
Sinha-Stanic. All very pretty, and the high street is surprisingly adept at 
mimicking the designer looks - as a fashion expert, I have trouble telling them 
apart. So why not save for Christmas, and go to Marks & Spencer. My favourites 
are the dark-blue, V-neck jewelled dress (£45) and grey jewel-detail chiffon 
dress (£49.50) in the Autograph collection. Monsoon is also good: I love the 
very simple, strapless charcoal rayon 'Dita sequin hem' dress (£95).

Q I've been lusting after the Balenciaga black ankle boots, but at more than 
£1,000 they're out of my league. I also love the skating boots at Marc by Marc 
Jacobs, but I can only afford around £100. Which are the best high-street 
versions?
Kellie

A The Balenciaga boots are so expensive because of the workmanship and 
detailing in their design. It's hard for the high street to replicate. If you 
can stretch your budget, Nicole Farhi has a black-suede pair with a buckled 
ankle strap that look fantastic, but they are still £299. However, the 
skating-boot look is easier to copy. Topshop has a high lace-up, skating-style 
ankle boot for £80. The leather may not endure as well as the designer version, 
but then again, the trend might not last for more than one season either.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
