
It’s that sugary time of year when I emerge from the station into a mown-grass 
pink-skied evening; the time when suburbs really come into their own. Long 
days, wide streets – I am faintly euphoric until I remember my existential 
crisis.

If you know me in real, you will have heard me boring on about this. I will 
have held your wrist as I described my return to the postcode where I grew up 
and bored on about the loss of my dreams. It was never meant to be this way, I 
will have said, enjoying the drama of the sentence. What I mean was: I never 
thought I’d return so fast to a life, though lovely, that I’d gratefully left 
behind.

“Lovely” was not a priority for my adulthood, placing firmly behind “fun” 
(which meant having all my friends living in the same block of flats as me, a 
sort of Barbary Lane but with human faeces by the gate), and also behind 
“unconventional”, which I quietly gave up on in around 2006. But I live here 
now – I keep having to say it, so my ears hear it and tell my head it’s real – 
back on the edge of suburbia. Except now suburbia is a different place.

In crisis, I’ve gone deep. I read an analysis of American suburbia in 
literature, from fiction (Richard Yates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/18/featuresreviews.guardianreview26>
’s gin-soakedRevolutionary Road) to a 1957 polemic describing postwar suburbs 
as “fresh-air slums” where people die. For many in mid-century America, the 
suburbs were seen as a dangerous social experiment – too many people, all of 
them the same. In a bestselling 1961 study, the authors rename it “Disturbia”. 
While suburban men were getting ill from the stress of travelling too much, 
suburban women (according to these books, with names likeThe Crack in the 
Picture Window) were getting ill because they were trapped.

I am drawn to these stories – I’m looking, I think, for darkness and romance 
in these places that trouble me. But I have to look a long way – it’s only in 
the US that David Lynch shows the suburbs to be places of oddness and 
perversion. It’s only in the US that the Stepford Wives patrol picket fences 
with glassy glee. Because here in the UK, suburbia has always been the stuff of 
comedy. Of status anxiety and Hyacinth Bucket, of late 70s-tinged TV where dogs 
have racist names, but that’s not the joke.

Perhaps it’s hard to show a depth to the suburbs today because they are 
changing beneath our feet. If once they were an escape from the city, today 
it’s as if the city has caught up and mugged them for their wallets. Down the 
road from me, hoardings surrounding a building site advertise penthouse 
apartments. They sprout in grey glass; they’d disturb the view if there was one.
Et in Arcadia... big shiny-dick buildings or something. Even “urban living” 
itself, and by that I mean the fantasies mocked up for those hoardings – a 
vision of coffee machines and women laughing over Chablis – can’t afford to 
live in town.

Instead it followed the families out to the sticks, where it orders a Big Shop 
on Ocado and spends its weekends car-booting for chairs. It is inevitable, I 
suppose. Suburbia was originally conceived as an alternative – a place of 
exclusivity away from the violence and vice of a city. But, as with Ryanair 
priority boarding, if everybody chooses it, the concept becomes redundant. 
Suburbs are no longer alternatives – while they’re the choice of a few, they’re 
the only option for the rest of us, squeezed out of the centre, reluctant, like 
ingrown hairs.

I wouldn’t have thought I’d ever mourn the suburbs of my youth, where the 
pavement between park and Poundland is trod wafer thin. But as I push the buggy 
sulkily past the new arts centre topped with bachelor pads, in part I’m feeling 
sorry for my younger self who thought the 7-Eleven that used to sit here was 
the height of class because it was American and stayed open late. When the 
suburbs finally disappear, what will we lose? Will more living experiments 
begin, in the suburbs of suburbs? Will their loss enable us the distance from 
which we can see their good side, their dark side, their depth?

Before it disappears completely – its greenery, its quiet – under a 
comfortable heap of culture and cash, I want British suburbia to be recognised 
as more than just a mossy joke. Then maybe I’ll come to terms with it properly. 
Maybe then I won’t be embarrassed to call it home.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman <mailto:@EvaWiseman>
