
Whether it’s destined to be a fairytale romance or a quick fumble behind a 
nightclub, every love affair has to start somewhere. The moment of truth. The 
very first date.

I’ve been on plenty of dates. I’ve sipped gin and tonics opposite dreamboats 
and deadbeats, sociopaths and social workers, models and morons. Some went 
well, many I knew were nonstarters within 20 minutes, and some were absolute 
Hollywood blockbuster levels of nightmare.

They have all taught me a lot about humans. Dates coughing into hands, picking 
noses when they thought I wasn’t looking, asking to meet in a bar where their 
ex is on a date three tables away, and displaying wildly varying levels of 
acceptable table manners; at times, I have felt I was watching my very own 
wildlife documentary.

I’m certain I’ve been someone’s worst date ever, and many have competed to be 
mine, but it will all have been worth it if it means I can save you from misery 
– by avoiding these classic ways to ruin the night.

Arrive late (or early)

The quickest way to make someone fall out of love with you before you’ve even 
met? Turn up late. Your excuses had better be good; ideally, they should 
involve rescuing baby animals from a burning building.


For me, arriving to meet someone at precisely the agreed time means you are, 
in fact, already late. But I am a very difficult person. On a date, however, 
even I suggest cutting yourself the tiniest bit of slack, for effect. Aim to 
get there around three to five minutes later than agreed. You want to introduce 
the faintest possibility that you might not turn up, only to breeze in after a 
couple of minutes, looking fantastic, so they can take in the sight of you and 
thank their lucky stars you’re there. Saunter in any later, smelling of 
after-work drinks or the 20 cigarettes you smoked on the way, though, and 
you’ve ruined everything, you heartless rotter.
 Disney. 
Not that arriving early will save you, either. You’ll drive yourself crazy 
with nerves, knock back too many liveners and barely be able to say “Hello” 
when your date arrives the optimum four minutes late, because they read this 
and you didn’t.

Admit you’ve looked them up on social media

Don’t even bother trying to tell me you haven’t had as good a root through all 
their social accounts as privacy settings will allow. You have to, because 
their airbrushed dating profile isn’t going to give you any blood and gore. 
Give any experienced dater 10 minutes on Google, and they’ll come up with 
research so detailed they could walk into a job at MI6 tomorrow – maybe even 
get an office with a window.
 Columbia. 
But don’t get sloppy. Never let slip that you thought their family dog was 
cute, and beware the dreaded accidental like of their Instagram photo of a 
quinoa salad from 2011. Sure, in your head you’re a curious soul eager to find 
shared interests. To your date, however, you’re creepy. You may as well take 
their face in both hands before the starter has arrived and say, “This moment 
is perfect, darling.”

Talk about your exes

Who cares about them? Exes are nobodies, irrelevant data, layers of old carbon 
and regret, lying beneath the lush meadows of singledom where you now happily 
wander. Exes should be consigned to history like flares,Eldorado 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1zZCtK399sM> and your teenage mixtapes.


Your date doesn’t want to hear about the rows and infidelities, disastrous 
holidays, forgotten birthdays and thoughtless gifts. There’s always the risk 
that, upon hearing all this mind-numbing trivia, your date will begin to think 
your ex may have had a point, and, yes, you were being unreasonable that time 
in Paris.
 MGM. 
Nor do they particularly want to hear about the good times, either; if it was 
so idyllic, why are you here, boring them to death about this deity you should 
never have let go? Be wonderfully vague with your relationship CV: leave it at 
“I’ve been happy just to be single for a while, but I’m now looking for… more.” 
Try not to wince as you see their eyes widen in delight at such an obvious line 
– they’re only human.

Talk about dating

If there were an awards ceremony dedicated to the most boring, inappropriate 
things to talk about on a date, “Your dating dramas and the dating scene in 
general” would be smoothing down its dress and double-checking its thank you 
speech. Listing your dating failures is the worst possible PR campaign you can 
do for yourself. Perhaps you think you’ll bond over your wry observations about
Tinder <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> and how difficult 
everything is in the digital age, but you’re actually presenting yourself as a 
disillusioned, loveless sardine whom everyone else caught, nibbled, then threw 
back into the sea.

Talk about things you like doing, that belong to the future; find common ground

Dating <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dating> stories are a 
torturous slideshow of the holiday snaps of people you’ve never met before, 
parties you don’t want to go to or flavours of crisps you know you’ll never try.

Talk about things you like doing, that belong to the future; find common 
ground. Chat about box sets, if you must. If you feel the urge to confess your 
luckless dating experiences, get a blog;I hear they’re terrific fun 
<https://theguyliner.com/>.

Talk about politics or sex

Political chat isn’t sexy, it’s looking for a fight. It’ll leave you red in 
the face, frothing with spittle and rage. Maybe you once saw a romcom where the 
two lead characters spent the entire movie arguing, then, in the last 15 
minutes or so, had angry, hate-fuelled sex, before falling hopelessly in love. 
Movies like that are made by fantasists.
 NBC. 
What will you say when your date vents their “interesting” opinions on 
immigration, or sexism, or people on benefits? Try to change their mind? How 
successful do you think you’ll be? Politics can be useful for weeding out 
distasteful weirdos, but you’re in for a long night. Also, consider the danger 
that they’ll be startlingly well-informed with clear, constructive arguments, 
thus exposing the fact that every ideology in your political arsenal came from 
a Tumblr account that posts quotes fromFreddy Got Fingered 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0240515/> over pictures of Michael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>.

Perhaps surprisingly, sex itself also tends to be first-date poison. Think of 
those righteous bros bragging about their “birds” in the locker room, or 
attention-seekers who had a one-night stand with an X Factor finalist in 2007, 
still the most out-there thing they’ve ever done. Boring. Nobody who has just 
met you wants to hear how good or bad your last shag was – they’re only 
interested in your next one. If you’re lucky.

Mock their tastes

Cool people. Ugh. You think, when you leave school, all that try-hard, 
hipper-than-thou nonsense ends, but there’s no escape. Don’t be that person. 
People take their favourite pastimes very seriously. Train sets, canoeing, 
camping,Rihanna <https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> – we all like to 
geek out about something. I’ll never quote Shakespeare at you, but I promise to 
serenade you with word‑perfect renditions ofMadonna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/madonna> album tracks when drunk. You gasp 
in horror when your date says they love theStar Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> prequels best of all. They tell you 
they loveMeghan Trainor <https://www.theguardian.com/music/meghan-trainor>, and 
you pull a face as if your teeth are made from Tangfastics. You sneer when they 
confess they’ve never seenThe Wire <http://www.theguardian.com/media/wire> or 
Breaking Bad <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/breaking-bad>. Telling 
someone they’re wrong for loving Grease 2, for example, comes with a health 
warning – they may well leap over the table and tear your throat out. When you 
question someone’s passion, don’t expect to survive.

Be lukewarm

“I find you really engaging.” Great, I’m a YouTube video. “What a lovely 
smile.” You would say this to the parent of an ugly child, and only under 
extreme pressure. “I was worried I’d be overdressed; I’m really glad you didn’t 
dress up, either.” If this praise were any fainter, it would be the sound of a 
mosquito singingBjörk <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bjork> in a karaoke 
bar. Compliment looks, humour, career, ability to retain useless facts – “Wow, 
I never knew that!” – and style. If you can’t think of something nice to say, 
just gaze at them and smile, then signal to the waiter to bring over some 
industrial-strength tequila.
 Paramount. 
Use your phone

Everyone knows that “I’m sorry I just need to take this” is code for “I’d 
rather sit my biology A-level again than be on this date.” Tempted to take your 
phone out while on a date? Why not just throw a drink over them? It more 
effectively communicates how you’re truly feeling. At least have the decency to 
wait until they’ve nipped off to the toilet before texting all your friends 
that your date’s a horse-frightener. And prepare yourself for the possibility 
that they’re holed up in a cubicle messaging their friends the exact same 
complaint.

Get too drunk (or not drunk enough)

I feel sorry for teetotallers on dates: all they have is their personalities. 
A sweet disposition will get you only so far, which means you’re going to need 
an accelerant – but how brightly the fire burns is tricky to get right. One 
minute you’re hugely charming and saying yes to that top-up, the next you’re 
slumped in your chair, burbling La Marseillaise. Always aim to be the least 
drunk, least annoying person – not just on a date, but in every single room you 
ever walk into. The perfect level of inebriation is about 30 seconds before 
you’ve noticed you’re too drunk.
 Gifbay. 
Stay completely sober, however, and you’ll really see the dating world for 
what it is: three hours of enforced socialising with someone whose outgoing 
voicemail message says only, “Yes, I’m free.” Being on a date with a drunk when 
you’re not is like trying to reason with a plate of jelly. You want to talk, 
they just want to sit there and wobble. You’ll regret you didn’t drink more 
and, in rare moments of clarity, so will your date. If you’re going to ruin the 
night entirely, you may as well get wasted for your trouble. Just keep pouring.

Fail to realise they fancy you

Imagine you could take a third person on a date – an impartial observer. This 
professional gooseberry’s sole purpose would be to watch how you get on, 
without interrupting, and, at the end of the date, tell you whether or not you 
should go in for a snog. Their decision would be final. Think of all the time 
and anguish that would save.

Why do we never see, sometimes until decades later, that we should have gone 
for it – taken a chance

Of all dating dramas, this is the one we overthink the most. Why do we never 
see, sometimes until decades later, that we should have gone for it – taken a 
chance, suggested another glass of wine?

Face-saving, insecurity and “playing it cool” are the Mean Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/19/mean-girls-10-birthday-tina-fey-comedy>
 of dating – don’t let them win. Act like you don’t care whether you make a 
fool of yourself, play it hotter than hot. Sizzle. If you suspect they’re 
interested in you, and you think the feeling’s mutual, don’t wait for them to 
make the first move: tell them what a brilliant time you’re having; ask if they 
want to go on for cocktails. So it’s a weeknight – so what? You can survive the 
hangover. What’s a day filled with yawns and low-level anxiety when it comes to 
true love?

• The Guyliner blogs at theguyliner.com <https://theguyliner.com/>
