
The dilemma I am a woman in my early 30s hoping at some point in the 
not-too-distant future to get married and raise a family. I have been single 
for quite a while, but recently I was surprised by my very good friend’s 
admission that he was “in love with” me and has been for 10 years.

I am now in a position to green-light the beginning of a relationship with a 
man who I am the best of friends with. Another friend, happily married to a man 
who similarly pined after her for many years, says I should give it a chance. 
The sexual attraction might come, she says, and everything else you want is 
already there. However, it isn’t like I haven’t thought about all this before. 
I see his brilliance, value his friendship, but have never wanted anything more 
from him. I’m inclined to follow my feelings and let him down, but should I 
give it a chance to see if deeper feelings follow the considered rationale?

Mariella replies Hell yes. Not that I don’t appreciate the leap into the 
unknown you’d be taking and the real possibility that you might damage a 
relationship that currently sustains you in other ways. We are primal beasts, 
but we’ve valiantly struggled through millennia to get a grip on our less 
savoury habits in order to create a more “civilised” world. Looking around it’s 
clearly still a work in progress.

There also remain areas where we seem more than happy to remain slaves to our 
“natural” impulses, and one of them is when seeking a mate and the closely 
connected issue of sex itself. It took many centuries for us to refine our 
romantic relationships into more than just a tumble in the foliage when the 
time was right. Organised religion did its bit to help, creating an optimistic, 
lifelong contract, binding us together through better and worse; and for a few 
centuries we lived in fear of breaking this union, no matter how challenging it 
had became.

Nowadays, as with so many aspects of contemporary life, we have increased 
options: caveats, opt-outs and, apparently on the rise, the choice not to get 
hitched at all. There may seem a long evolutionary road between a bunk-up on a 
branch and a walk down the aisle. But on current evidence of western 
behavioural norms it seems we all still veer toward the former when it comes to 
making partnership choices.

I don’t usually advocate alcohol but imbibing something to liberate you from 
rational decision making could be key

I appreciate there are many who think it’s highly sophisticated to be able to 
pull out their smart phone and find a partner for passion in the vicinity 
within moments. Phone apps like Tinder, Grindr, Happn, Findhrr and other 
vowel-eschewing online destinations have taken the legwork out of our sexual 
liaisons but have they in any way improved the quality of the encounter? On 
face value, being grabbed by the hair and shoved behind a bush when you’re 
fertile and willing has much in common with locating an acceptable stranger in 
a crowded bar and heading off for similar. It could even be called regressive! 
Putting sex on a Google Map for those in the mood for love is one thing, but 
it’s curious, isn’t it, that when we’re looking for a partner for more than an 
instant fix we tend to employ the same criteria? Top of our list of essential 
components is whether or not we are overcome by desire: a state of being that 
has nothing to do with reason and thought and much to do with base instinct. As 
any veteran of a long union will tell you, sex (though on the “to do” list) 
slips down the list of priorities for daily harmony pretty soon.

It’s definitely important to be able to countenance coupling with the person 
you select, but long-term passion will dwindle and if you haven’t got respect, 
friendship and a genuine interest in the person you’re with there’s not a 
chance of the relationship surviving. That’s why unions embarked on in the 
haste of desire and sustained on little else, more often in youth, tend to be 
the first to crumble.

So let’s talk about you, with your devoted male friend and your desire to 
create a family. You’ve got a man in your life who offers you everything but 
the impulse to get carnally acquainted. I’d be inclined to take a step forward 
and see where it leads. Most of us who select monogamy in adulthood tend to 
choose mates who bear little relation to the passion provokers of our 20s. 
That’s surely because an element of consideration enters an arena previously 
ruled only by pheromones.

I’m not usually one to advocate alcohol, but imbibing something that might 
briefly liberate you from rational decision-making could be the key to figuring 
out your choice. This man sounds like he’s got a lot to offer and 
re-programming your instinctive desires is often just fine tuning. It would be 
a shame to let a little thing like sex stand in the way of such a potentially 
rewarding partnership. A night out with no holds barred could mark the 
beginning of a new life, and, dealt with decently, doesn’t need to end your 
friendship if not.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>
Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
