
What a treat to have lunch with AA Gill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> at the Wolseley, I thought. I 
thought wrong. Of course the Wolseley is lovely and, because it is Adrian Gill, 
we have the best front corner table, but as a lunch companion he leaves a lot 
to be desired. For a start, he arrives 15 minutes late, sopping wet and in an 
anorak, having cycled through a rainstorm from his Fulham Road home. He 
actually looks scruffy, which I have never seen him look before, though I have 
known him for yonks. Then he says that his children (his two teenage children 
from his second marriage - he also has baby twins) are coming to pick him up at 
two. 'But it gives us an hour - you don't mind do you?' Actually I do mind - I 
like my lunches leisurely - but it's very hard to throw a strop with Gill when 
he is in his lazy charm mode. And of course because he knows 'everyone', we 
keep being interrupted by people coming over to say hello - the weird one in 
what looks like a clown's wig turns out to be Bob Geldof.

I knew Gill doesn't drink (he is a reformed alcoholic) but more surprisingly 
he doesn't eat . He orders only a salade nicoise and barely picks at it. I 
order duck confit but Gill says that's a bad idea - the duck they use at the 
Wolseley are not fatty enough - confit should be made from foie gras ducks. He 
says I should have the Wiener schnitzel, so that's what I have - which is fine, 
except that I can't help remembering the words of a famous food writer on the 
subject of Wiener schnitzel: 'The most a Wiener schnitzel can aim for is utter 
indifference.' The writer was AA Gill.

We are at the Wolseley because Gill is publishing a slim volume called 
Breakfast <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/breakfast> at the Wolseley, 
which is an essay by him with recipes from the Wolseley's chefs. It's fine if 
you want to know the history of croissants, or how to make them, and of course 
Gill enjoyed writing it because it meant eating lots of breakfasts at the 
Wolseley. But if you want to taste the wit and (I say it reluctantly) wisdom of 
AA Gill you should read his Table Talk, which contains the choicest nuggets 
from his 15 years of Sunday Times restaurant reviewing. As his regular readers 
know, he rarely mentions restaurants but has a lot to say about food generally. 
Much of his best writing is inspired by hate ('Hate is good. Hate is fine') and 
Table Talk gives us a good whirl round his hates - amuse-gueules, truffle oil, 
dinner parties ('the work of the devil'), balsamic vinegar, coulis, gastro-pubs 
('Food and pubs go together like frogs and lawnmowers'), fat people, Christmas 
dinner, Greek food, Tex-Mex, wheatgrass juice, Starbucks ('Asking Americans to 
make coffee is like asking them to draw a map of the world'), warm salads, 
winkles, seasonal eating ('The whole march of agrarian history has been a 
half-famished marathon to overcome the tyranny of the seasons') and organic 
food. He also takes frequent pot shots at vegetarians whom he defines as 
'people who get pleasure from not eating things' and says he knows about 
vegetarians because he went to a vegetarian boarding school. Oh yes - he also 
claims that whale meat is delicious and we should eat more of it. Don't write 
to me to complain, write to him.

Through only slightly gritted teeth, I manage to congratulate him on recently 
winning yet another British Press Award. How many is that now? I ask and fail 
to disguise my delight when he says three (I have five) - I thought he won them 
every year. No, he says, he gets nominated every year but 'I think they put me 
in the nominations just so that the people who do win can really feel they've 
won something important!' Ah, this is what I love about Adrian - his total lack 
of false modesty or indeed any modesty. He knows he's a brilliant writer and is 
not afraid to say so. He also believes - but here I think he's on shakier 
ground - that he is devastatingly handsome and that the world simply cannot get 
enough photographs of AA Gill. The reason he writes travel articles, I 
maintain, is so that he can pose for them in silly foreign hats. He disagrees: 
'I love travelling. And I don't think I dress up any more than is necessary,' 
he huffs. 'I dress appropriately.'

Anyway, he is a bloody good writer but then he works at being good - he tries 
harder than any journalist I know. And the fact that he can write at all is 
almost miraculous given how dyslexic he is. He once showed me an article in 
progress and it was completely indecipherable - he puts in every letter that 
could conceivably be relevant which means the computer spellcheck can't begin 
to guess what word he is aiming for. So he writes his articles in his own 
spelling then dictates them to copytakers at the Sunday Times. He's lucky they 
still have copytakers - perhaps they keep one specially for Gill.

I was on the Sunday Times when AA Gill joined in 1993 and recognised 
immediately that a new star had been born. But he was so prolific I kept 
saying, 'He'll never keep it up'. Well, it is 15 years now, and he shows no 
signs of flagging. He writes far more than most journalists - a restaurant 
column and TV column every week, travel pieces or features roughly once a 
month, a column on fatherhood for GQ, odd pieces for Vanity Fair . And, he 
boasts, he also writes for Australian Gourmet Traveller , 'so that the sun 
never sets on my writing'. But at least now he has given up writing novels. He 
did two, Sap Rising and Starcrossed, in the late Nineties that were so bad they 
were baffling. They seemed to consist of him babbling all the dirty words he 
knew and dreaming up elaborately disgusting sex scenes, including one where a 
woman had sex with a dog. Jeremy Langmead, one of his former editors, told me 
that Gill is obsessed with trying to slip double entendres past his editors. 
Someone else told me that she'd known him silence a dinner party with his 
potty-mouth. There is a primitive, unreconstructed schoolboy in him, who likes 
jokes about farts and poo and ladies' rude bits. He, I've always believed, must 
have been behind the odd incident a few years ago when Nicola Formby, his 
girlfriend, had lunch with Piers Morgan and presented him with a sheaf of 
photographs of herself cavorting on a bed naked. Presumably Morgan was meant to 
take them as a come-on which she would then giggle about with Gill. Instead, 
Morgan handed the photographs back politely and reported the incident in his 
book The Insider. Gill claims Morgan made the whole thing up. Why didn't he 
sue, then? 'Oh because I'm never going to sue anyone, ever. I think Piers 
Morgan is a pretty objectionable self-publicist, but he has no room in my head. 
I know what the truth is.' Hmm.

He was 38 when he arrived at the Sunday Times - a late starter because he'd 
spent all his twenties being a drunk, but he thinks this gave him an advantage: 
'When I joined the Sunday Times the people I was competing with were all 10 or 
15 years younger, they all had double firsts from Oxford or Cambridge, they 
were all bright as new pins. But I'd spent that 15 years wetting myself and 
getting into fights and living a sort of subterranean life but it meant I had 
had 15 years more experience - which was incredibly useful, and meant that I 
just wrote better than they did. Because there is no better tool for writing 
than experience. It has very little to do with grammar and everything to do 
with knowing. And the other thing it gave me, I think - one of the common 
things alcoholics have is that you always feel on the outside, you think that 
everyone else knows what they're doing and you don't, and you're winging it and 
having to pick up signs from other people because you don't understand how 
things actually work. And I think that makes you very observant.'

It's a bit of a mystery why he became an alcoholic because neither of his 
parents drank. I'm always telling him he must have had an unhappy childhood and 
he laughs and says, 'I know. It's a bugger, that. It would make so much more 
sense of everything if I did. But I didn't. My parents were wonderful.' His 
father was the television director Michael Gill who directed Civilisation; his 
mother an actress who now teaches public speaking to businessmen. They were 
both left-wing - his mother at one point was in the Socialist Workers Party. 
Gill's younger brother, Nick, went to Holland Park Comprehensive but Gill 
suffered from a stammer as well as dyslexia so his parents sent him to a 
'progressive' co-ed boarding school, St Christopher's in Letchworth, which he 
hated, not least because it was vegetarian. (Michael Winner also went there - 
it's clearly the place to send your children if you want them to end up as 
Sunday Times restaurant reviewers.) But even at school he started drinking 
quite seriously - he remembers regularly walking one-and-a-half miles to the 
pub - and, by 19, when he went to art school (the Slade) and embarked on his 
long failure as an artist, he was drinking every day.

From the age of five, all he ever wanted to do was be an artist, and his 
parents were fine about sending him to the Slade. But he remembers having 
arguments with his father about what he would do afterwards. 'I was a militant 
teenager and he felt infuriated and threatened and I felt put upon and hard 
done by. And at one point I remember him saying, "You should be a journalist" - 
he'd started as a journalist - and my being furious and saying, "But I can't 
read or write!" That was years and years before I ever thought of writing.'

Instead, he moved seamlessly onto the dole after art school and spent seven 
years trying unsuccessfully to be an artist. And drinking. He says it's a 
mystery how he could afford it - he once worked out that he spent pounds 40 a 
week on a booze, when his income was pounds 19. 'I don't remember ever stealing 
things, but I suppose I was endlessly borrowing money off people. And I always 
had very accommodating girlfriends.' Why? 'Yes, why? That's a very good 
question!' One of them, Cressida Connolly, even married him, albeit briefly. 
Why would a nice girl like Cressida Connolly do that? 'Well I was also quite 
nice! I wasn't the hideously unpleasant person I've grown to be as a sober 
adult!'

But by his late twenties, he was four stone overweight and drinking vodka and 
Benylin through a straw because his hand shook too badly to raise the glass. 'I 
had an awful lot of the very bad physical symptoms of chronic alcoholism - I 
had DTs, both the delirium - seeing things, seeing monsters - and the tremens, 
uncontrollable shakes. I had peripheral neuritis which is tingling in your face 
and fingers, like palsy, and the worst thing was alcoholic gastritis which 
means feeling sick whenever you eat and throwing up every single morning, and 
you then start damaging your oesophagus. I also burst all the blood vessels in 
my eyes. I'm still covered in scars that I don't know how I got, from falling 
over or getting hit or whatever. And all the humiliations that come with being 
a drunk - wetting yourself, peeing in the bed, being sick over people - all 
those classic, dull, tedious drunk things I did regularly for quite a long 
time. But that's not the point. Ultimately what is the real destroying thing is 
the depression, the self-loathing, and the fear - a lot of being drunk is to do 
with being frightened all the time.'

Eventually, on April Fools' Day, 1984, when he was 30 and already yellow with 
hepatitis, he took the train to Clouds (a fashionable detox clinic), and drank 
his last alcohol - champagne - on the train. He has never touched a drop since. 
Did he go to AA? 'Yes. But the point about the anonymous bit of AA is that you 
don't talk about it.' Does he still go to AA? 'Well, let's just say, I know 
where it is.' Does he mentor other alcoholics in recovery? 'I might do. Yes. I 
used to. But again, it's one of those things that, being anonymous, you don't 
talk about.' Is he ever tempted to drink again? 'No. Not at the moment. Touch 
wood. No.' Surely by now he must be home and dry? 'Dry - but not home. I'm an 
ex-drunk but I'm not an ex-alcoholic.'

Anyway, he emerged clean and sober into his thirties and married a venture 
capitalist, Amber Rudd, and had two children - Flora, now 16, and Alistair, 14. 
He was still trying to paint, but also teaching cookery courses - he had taught 
himself to cook while he was an art student. Then a friend asked him to write 
about the artist Craigie Aitchison and other art reviews followed. But the 
great breakthrough came when Jane Procter, the editor of Tatler, asked him to 
do a piece on Clouds. She remembers sobbing when she read his article, it was 
so moving. She signed him up to do a cookery column for Tatler and the Sunday 
Times poached him in 1993. He has been there ever since and is probably their 
highest-paid writer. Once, when his editor asked him to write to a particularly 
tight deadline, he said he'd do it if they sent him a puppy. The editor paused 
only a beat before asking, 'What breed?' He said a Parson Russell terrier bitch 
and the puppy arrived the next week.

He seemed happily married but in 1995, much to the surprise of their friends, 
he suddenly left his wife and children for 'the Blonde', Nicola Formby, a South 
African model and girl-about-town, best known in those days for being Lord 
Linley's ex-girlfriend though she later became a writer for Tatler. Why did he 
leave Amber - is he a compulsive bolter? 'No! I'm much more a clinger. Oh yes. 
I'm the one who grabs your ankles saying I'll change, I'll change.' But 
evidently he didn't do that with Amber because he went off with Nicola, and 
wrote many nauseating articles about her devastating beauty. He always said 
that if Nicola ever had children he hoped they would be by him, but it began to 
seem rather unlikely as the years rolled by (he always claims not to know 
Nicola's age but concedes she must have passed the big four-0) until last year, 
when she suddenly produced twins, Edith and Isaac. I asked if they'd had IVF 
but Gill says, 'that's not something I'm going into - it all worked out all 
right'.

He says that late fatherhood - he is 54 - 'is the best thing. I just really 
like being a father. And I think what's different this time is that I'm not as 
hectic. When the first two were born, I was just starting to write and not 
making very much money - Amber was making all the money. So I was quite keen to 
get on, and I was anxious about having a new baby and supporting her and all 
that, so I was always working.' Whereas now, he says, he works in a 
glass-walled study off the kitchen and is very happy when the twins interrupt 
him. 'I think all men should have late babies.' And early babies? 'Yes - and 
middle babies. I think you should have as many babies as possible.'

It means, though, that he and Nicola are much less social than they used to be 
- they used to be the perfect power couple, out on the town six nights a week 
(the seventh was for watching television, to do his review) but now they often 
stay home and cook. 'That's probably no bad thing. It's a bit of a relief 
actually, as you get older. I don't go to the openings of shops or parties 
given by people I don't know. I used to think that because I had such a wide 
remit of stuff to write about, I had to see everything and be everywhere. And 
in those days - it's different now - there used to be three book launches, five 
shop openings and a restaurant do every day, with human statues holding up 
canape trays - I got to know all the girls in short black skirts with 
clipboards. But now I'm older I can't be bothered - I didn't enjoy them then 
and I enjoy them even less now.'

After our brief, unsatisfactory lunch at the Wolseley, I said I wanted to see 
him at home and he said I could, provided I didn't write about the actual house 
(I was rather rude about his last one). So I went round a few days later and 
found him in the throes of children's tea, holding Isaac, talking goo-goo to 
Edith, the picture of proud fatherhood. Eventually Nicola and the nanny scooped 
the twins up for bathtime, and he said, 'Go on then - ask me all your worst 
questions.' So I asked him what he earned and he said he didn't know (I reckon 
over £300,000 a year) and I asked him how old Nicola is and he said he didn't 
know and I asked if he still goes to AA and he said he couldn't tell me.

And then I asked what happened to his brother Nick which is the one subject 
guaranteed to upset him. Nick was his only sibling and he disappeared in 1999. 
He was a highly successful chef, one of the first English chefs to win a 
Michelin star - Marco always says he was an important influence. He worked at a 
country-house hotel called Hambleton Hall, but then started his own restaurant 
which was not a success. He also got divorced. One day in 1999 he told Gill, 
'I'm having a miserable time. I'm going to disappear for a bit', and has not 
been seen since. Gill hoped that he would turn up for their father's funeral 
two years ago (there were obituaries of Michael Gill in all the newspapers) but 
he didn't. Perhaps he's dead? 'I never think of him as being dead,' Gill 
insists. 'I like to think of him as being somewhere out in the world.' Why does 
he think his brother disappeared? 'He had his own demons.' Drink? Drugs? 
'Again, I'm not going to speak for him.' And the shutters come down.

This is the thing about Adrian. You feel he's opening up, you feel you're 
getting to know him, but there is this bunker inside that you will never 
penetrate. He surprised me years ago by saying he was a Christian - it came as 
news to even his closest friends, like Jeremy Clarkson. He surprised me this 
time by saying he is more left-wing than right - I'd always had him down as a 
committed Thatcherite. But he says that one of the reasons he hates organic 
food is that 'it has reinvigorated the old class distinction in food - trying 
to make people feel guilty for buying cheap chickens'.

So what are his core beliefs? 'Well one is that I'm a Christian. And I believe 
in being honest - that's really important - telling the truth. I suppose to be 
kind whenever you can be. I also want to have an optimism about people - I 
would rather leave my wallet on the table and have it nicked once or twice than 
have it chained in my back pocket.'

When he was talking about his drinking years he said he always had the sense 
of winging it - does he still feel that? 'Oh yes. It never goes. Oh there's 
still that deep insecurity, this having to ... I was going to say "be a fraud" 
but it's not being a fraud, it's having to continually make up who you are. I 
still have that feeling that everyone else got given a script and I didn't. I'm 
amazed at people who seem to have plans, who say, "Oh next year we'll do this, 
and in five years we'll sell the company" - I mean how do they know? I suppose 
now I'm in a profession where there' no point in having plans, but I've never 
had one. And I've always assumed that it will all be taken away, that someone 
will come along and say, "That's enough".'

Is he still happy being a journalist? 'Yes, I think so. I mean it wasn't what 
I set out to do - I set out to be a painter and it was that really awkward 
thing that I was just good enough to keep myself doing it, but not good enough 
to be top-rate. And that's really horrible. I tried lots of things - portrait 
painting, murals, illustration - and I could just about make a living but it 
really wasn't going anywhere and when I started to write, it really was like 
coming home. I had that feeling of, Oh for God's sake, this is what I was 
supposed to be doing. And so the pleasure is in finding something you're good 
at. I don't ever want to retire - Bill Deedes [who was still writing when he 
died last year at 94] is the patron saint of columnists. I want to go on doing 
this for ever.'

On the food blog

Is AA Gill God? Let us know what you think of the notorious critic, and if 
you've seen his site, onWord of Mouth 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/food/2008/05/aagill.html>

· Breakfast at the Wolseley by AA Gill is published by Quadrille, pounds 
12.99. To order a copy for pounds 11.99 with free UK p&p go to
observer.co.uk/bookshop <http://www.observer.co.uk/bookshop> or call 0870 836 
0885

Breakfast at the Wolseley

Omelette Arnold Bennett

Serves 2

250g smoked haddock 
150ml milk 
1/2 onion 
1 1/2 bay leaves 
1 clove 
125ml hollandaise sauce 
4 tbs double cream 
8 large eggs, plus 2 extra egg yolks 
clarified butter, for frying 
chopped chives

Poach the haddock in the gently simmering milk along with the onion, bay 
leaves and clove until the flesh flakes readily: about 5 minutes. Remove the 
haddock, flake the fish into a large mixing bowl and leave to cool.

Mix the hollandaise sauce, cream and the extra egg yolks. Set aside.

To make the clarified butter, melt the butter in a heavy pan over a gentle 
heat. Skim the surface until only clear liquid remains. Remove from the heat 
and allow it to settle and cool until tepid, then carefully tip out the 
clarified butter into a clear bowl leaving any solid residue behind. (It is 
very important to use butter.) To make the omelette, preheat a hot grill. Heat 
the clarified butter in a very clean, dry well-seasoned or non-stick omelette 
pan. (A 20cm pan is recommended for a three-egg omelette.)

Beat three eggs and a yolk together, but not too much, or they will be heavier 
and more watery. Pour into the pan. It should be hot enough for the butter to 
have stopped foaming, but should not be smoking. As the curds cook, use a 
spatula to draw the outer edges into the middle, allowing uncooked egg to flow 
into contact with the hot pan. Add any seasoning at this stage - but don't let 
the egg cook through.

Tip the omelette out onto a heatproof serving plate and spoon over half of the 
cooked haddock. Spoon over half the hollandaise mix and place under the grill 
until it begins to glaze.

Make the second omelette while that is glazing and finish it in the same way. 
Sprinkle with chives and serve.
