
Here in America we are experiencing a wave of superhero movies. Some say this 
has to do with a pervasive sense of impotence in the face of a disappointing 
government and/or global warming and/or the feeling of fear, bordering on 
paranoia, that has suffused the national discourse since 9/11. My feeling is, 
people like seeing men in tight clothes and capes doing impossible things. I 
know I do. I recently hired a crew of unemployed guys, gave them tights and 
capes, and told them to do various impossible things: balance my chequebook, 
listen to an entire disco album, think up a new George Bush joke.

Earlier this summer we had Iron Man, about a man whose super power is, you 
know, he's made of iron. We had Batman: The Dark Knight, about a guy whose 
super power is he doesn't actually have a super power but is just incredibly 
rich. We had The Incredible Hulk, about a man who, when he becomes angry, turns 
green and goes ballistic.

Then we had Typical Man, about a man who, when he becomes angry, says 
something stupid at a party, then feels bad and has too much to drink, then 
says something else stupid, and his wife corrects him in front of all their 
friends, so he goes out and pouts in the car, and is just starting to feel 
better when his wife comes out and again rebukes him, and they drive home in 
bitter silence.

We had Complainer Fellow, who finds fault with everything, and continues 
complaining even when the time for complaint has long passed because of 
deep-seated psychological problems stemming back to his Catholic childhood.

We had Inappropriate Sexual Remark Man, able to turn every conversation around 
to sex, even at a funeral, even when teaching a pottery class at the local old 
folks' home. He tracks down his nemesis to his secret lair, and attempts to 
capture the nemesis by embarrassing him with double entendres. It doesn't work. 
His nemesis just files a sexual harassment lawsuit, then destroys the world 
anyway.

We had Facial Tic Man who, whenever he gets nervous, lifts one eyebrow and 
then the other in rapid succession. He knows it doesn't do much to fight crime 
but he just can't help it. We had Too Old To Dress That Flashily Girl, an 
80-year-old woman whose costume consists of a very short skirt and thigh-high 
boots, who fights crime by striding into underground crime hangouts and 
inciting waves of nervous tittering.

We had Le Auteur Homme, about a man who fights the wave of superhero movies by 
making intelligent movies about real people. A big flop, due to its unrealistic 
premise.
