
We've had a roller-coaster week, with gentle ups and vertical downs. A few 
months ago we decided to turn an old railway siding into a spoon-carver's 
cabin. It's a concrete thing, with four walls and a floor. The dimensions are 
tiny, but just about adequate: two and a half metres by three. According to 
your point of view, it feels like a monastic or prison cell. The idea was that 
it could become somewhere warm and dry in the woods where our resident carver 
could sit and do his thing.

We've spent every spare minute since October trying to put on a roof, fix in a 
window and a door and a new wooden floor. Everything, of course, takes longer 
and costs double what you expect. It's been dark and cold out there and every 
day one of us says "Oh" as we realise with horror that we've screwed something 
in back to front or upside down or haven't thought about something incredibly 
obvious. But it's almost finished and is beginning to look beautiful, 
unexpectedly cosy and rustic.

There's no electricity out there, which is fine – we've got an old paraffin 
lamp and a lot of candles. But it needs warmth. So we went to a reclamation 
centre and picked up an old stove. It's tiny and cylindrical, but wonderfully 
efficient. It burns twigs and sticks which you feed in vertically and it gives 
off great heat. It's got space for a kettle on top. Fixing the stove and the 
flue was supposed to be the cherry on the cake.

The first downer was realising that our reclaimed stove had an irregular flue 
size. And even if we could find a flue, the cost was astonishing. As the chap 
in the shop began talking prices, we were wondering if there's some sort of 
flue cartel in this country. A few metres would cost hundreds of pounds. We 
walked out, went back to the reclamation place and picked up some old 
drainpipes. The guy there seems to like us and gave them to us for free.

We brought them home and tried to design a flue ourselves. We brought all the 
measurements and drew up some basic plans for what we needed. A nearby forge 
reckoned they could do it for us on the cheap. We thought we were brilliant: 
being creative and cool and economical. When we got the flue back from the 
forge it was three or four metres of very heavy metal with three 45-degree 
joins. With a cowl on top it wasn't, of course, cheap, but it was a third of 
what we would have paid.

To find a couple of sheets of metal, we hung around the recycling centre and 
picked up a couple of rusty bits from the skip. Now, I don't like working with 
metal. Wood's my medium. But we spent a weekend cutting metal plates for the 
flue to go through; we put bolts in the wall and fire cement and rock wool 
where they were needed. After two days' hard work in the freezing cold, it 
looked stunning: the stove, an artisan flue, and shiny bolts and fixings. 
We were proud of ourselves.

Pride comes before the fall, and this was quite a crash. As it was snowing 
outside, we eagerly lit our beautiful stove. This was the moment the concrete 
shack was supposed to turn into a welcoming, warm cabin, a mini-monument to 
self-reliance. But our hearts sank. Smoke immediately began to billow into the 
room. Within a minute you couldn't see your hand in front of your face. Nothing 
was coming out of the chimney. Maybe we had put too many bends in the flue. 
Maybe there was ice down there, or some small animal. Whatever it was, the 
thing just wasn't drawing. I've rarely felt so deflated. All that hard work, 
cutting and fixing metal, bolting and building and spending cash, and the whole 
thing was cocked up.

The next morning I climbed a ladder and reached down inside the flue from 
above. I don't know whether I was more relieved or angry. It was completely 
blocked. Instead of using our drainpipes, the guys at the forge had used their 
own pipes, one of which had a spigot jammed down inside it. We had to 
angle-grind off the top, yank out the spigot and replace the cowl. We relit the 
stove and this time it drew beautifully. There's light, as well as smoke, at 
the end of the tunnel.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
