
Prince Harry <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry> was coaxed into 
making a rare statement about his views on the media coverage of his life.

In responding to what Andrew Marr <http://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr>
 acknowledged was “a cheeky question” during his TV programme, the prince spoke 
of “incessant” and “unnecessary” intrusions into his privacy.

Marr asked: “A bit like your mother, you are pursued every minute of every day 
by lots of people trying to take photographs, videoing, recording what you’re 
saying, pushing... how can you possibly have a private life?”

“Sadly,” said the prince, “that line between public and private life is almost 
non-existent.” Then came what sounded like a heartfelt statement:

“Everyone has a right to their privacy, and a lot of the members of the public 
get it, but sadly in some areas there is this sort of incessant need to find 
out every little bit of detail about what goes on behind the scenes. It’s 
unnecessary.”

Prince Harry went on to say that he and other members of the royal family were 
“completely aware that we are in a very privileged position”, adding:


“I will spend the rest of my life earning that privilege and trying to bring a 
spotlight on to things and causes that really matter to me, and hopefully 
matter to a lot of other people as well.”

One of those causes, the Invictus Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/invictus-games>, was the reason for his 
appearance on Marr’s BBC1 programme on Sunday morning. He was speaking from 
Florida where the tournament for injured service personnel and veterans is 
being held.

He conceived of the idea of the games after he was refused permission to serve 
in Iraq and accompanying three severely wounded soldiers on a plane trip.

It was, he told Marr, “a turning point” in his life and prompted him to note 
his split roles as an army officer and a member of the monarchy: he was Captain 
Wales and also Prince Harry.


The prince, again subtly encouraged by Marr, made a brief reference to his 
mother, Princess Diana. The games were not “a sensitive subject”, he said, 
unlike his mother’s support for the campaign against land mines.

He was responsible for launching the Invictus Games two years ago and is 
patron of the foundation that organises the event.


The five-day paralympic-style tournament involves more than 500 athletes from 
15 countries who are competing in a range of sports.
