
I was working for Andy Warhol’s Interview and writing plays when I first met 
Holly Woodlawn <http://hollywoodlawnsuperstar.com/>. She was part of a group of 
people that I knew downtown – among themJackie Curtis 
<http://www.jackiecurtis.com/> and Candy Darling 
<http://www.warholstars.org/candy_darling.html> – who were adjacent to the 
Factory. It was the mid-1970s and the beginning of Holly. It was kind of the 
beginning of all of those people.

I can’t say we ever had a close friendship – Holly was part of my broad circle 
of friends and acquaintances – but she and I once made some kind of underground 
movie together. It was a 16mm film set on Fire Island inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> and shot at the photographer 
Sante Forlano’s beach house in the Pines. Vincent Nasso was the make-up artist. 
I can’t even remember who the director was, or what it was about – it was just 
this crazy thing of people ad-libbing their asses off.

Holly was a hoot, as Holly was always a hoot. She was totally, totally 
hilarious. Unfettered. A nut job, basically. She was a very good spirit. Holly 
and I had a scene together – it was a quarrel scene of some sort and there was 
a reconciliation, though whether Holly and I were supposed to have been playing 
a couple or angry neighbours, who knows?

What I do remember is that she (and maybe this was Vincent’s doing) had those 
amazing eyebrows by then, the ones that looked like existential question marks.

“You can’t take everything too heavy in life,” Holly would tell me years 
later. It was useful advice, because what were the opportunities for a person 
such as her?

Holly didn’t identify as transgender then – that’s something that’s been 
written about her since – but she had not managed to parlay her downtown 
credentials into a full-blown career the way other Factory people had. But she 
was a survivor.

New York at the time was nearly bankrupt, the city was in terrible shape, yet 
at the same time there was a tremendous amount of creativity that came out of 
that. People lived by any number of schemes and scams. Most of those people 
were living on welfare, so there was a kind of enterprising sense of 
possibility about the city. Holly was emblematic of that moment, out of which 
came a lot of social and cultural change. She was certainly a beneficiary of 
that moment, but she wasn’t the author of it. Rather she was bobbing along on 
it – wonderfully, amusingly and wittily so.

If there’s anything I’ve taken away from Holly’s death at the end of last 
year, it’s that she’s a representative of a bygone New York and of a group of 
people the likes of which we’re not going to see again.

Guy Trebay is the Culture and Style reporter for the New York Times
