
Vice is to launch TV and digital services in more than 50 countries, as the 
youth-focused media company continues to expand aggressively.

It has struck a range of deals with international media partners to bring TV, 
mobile and digital services to regions including the Middle East, Africa, India 
and south-east Asia.

Vice will also extend its services in existing markets including Australia, 
New Zealand and Canada.

The deals will see a expansion of Vice’s empire – which include the Viceland 
TV channel, Vice News and lifestyle, culture and entertainment programming – 
from about 30 countries to more than 80.


Overall, the company’s new Viceland TV channel will be available in 44 
countries.

“Earlier this year it was widely reported that I announced that we would 
launch Viceland in 12 countries in 12 months and that is not true,” said Vice 
co-founder and chief executive Shane Smith at the Cannes Lions advertising 
festival on Wednesday.

“We will in fact be launching in 44 countries (for those keeping score that’s 
less than four months in) making Viceland the fastest growing television 
network in history.”

The mix of new deals range from launching “three screens” in new markets – 
mobile, a 24-hour TV channel and digital services – to just one, or a 
combination, of each.

In March, Vice announced it was to launch a TV channel on Sky in the UK and 
Ireland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/09/vice-tv-channel-sky-uk-viceland>, 
its first channel launch in Europe. The deal wasthe first of 12 channels Vice 
pledged to launch across Europe over an 18-month period 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/16/vice-media-to-launch-russia-eastern-europe>
.

Vice also recently said it will launch in Russia and half-a-dozen eastern 
European countries.

Middle East

A deal with Dubai-based Moby media group, in which Rupert Murdoch has a stake, 
will enable Vice to launch in a dozen countries in the Middle East including 
Iran, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Afghanistan.

“There’s a massive young audience in the Middle East and North Africa that’s 
intensely engaged in the debates and stories happening around them – but no one 
is focused on offering them the immersive, locally produced content that they 
want,” said Smith.

In acknowledgement of the difficulties media companies can run into in the 
region, Vice is setting up an independent management team to provide “creative 
stewardship to ensure Vice remains on brand, whilst adapting to the region’s 
nuances and sensitivities to develop relevant content for the region’s 
audiences”.

South-east Asia

Vice has struck a deal with Singapore-head quartered Multi Channels Asia to 
launch the 24-hour Viceland TV channel in 18 countries including Malaysia, 
Thailand and Vietnam.

India

Vice has linked up with with the Times of India Group, owner of media assets 
including the world’s biggest-selling English language newspaper, to launch 
mobile, digital and the launch of the Viceland channel on pay-TV. “Its Indian 
operation, which will include producing and distributing content locally, will 
be headquartered in Mumbai.

Africa

Vice has struck a deal with Econet Media, the entertainment business that 
operates across sub-Saharan Africa, that will see 17 countries including 
Nigeria, Zimbabwe, Ethiopia and Kenya receive the 24-hour Viceland TV channel 
by the end of next year.

Australia and New Zealand

Vice is expanding its existing operations in Australia, which have existed 
since 2003, through a deal with broadcaster SBS to launch Viceland free-to-air 
later this year. In New Zealand, Vice has extended its operation through a deal 
with Sky to launch Viceland later this year as part of its basic subscription 
TV package.

Canada

Vice began life as an English-language magazine in Montreal in 1994. More than 
20 years later the company is to launch Viceland TV for Canada’s 
French-speaking population after striking a deal with Groupe V Media.
