
Q I am due to give birth in May and I need to buy some maternity bras, but 
everything I've seen so far is really ugly. Is there any pretty or, dare I say 
it, slightly sexy underwear for mums-to-be?
Jen

A This is the perfect time for you to feel pretty and sexy. There's a great 
lingerie label from New Zealand in Blooming Marvellous stores (or on
www.bloomingmarvellous.com <http://www.bloomingmarvellous.com>) called Hot Milk 
Lingerie. Prices start from £13.99 for knickers, with bras, briefs and French 
knickers in gorgeous sets, such as the Cherry Bomb Chic, which has a vibrant 
red-flower print edged in lace, or the Silver Sass Kitten, set in a 
silver-damask print with silver trim. They can be worn from pregnancy to 
breastfeeding (they have nursing clasps) and go from a 32C to a 38F.

Q I walk to work and need to find a long trenchcoat with a hood. I want 
something stylish and smart enough to wear with a business suit. Umbrellas are 
useless on Sheffield's windy hills. I'd prefer something for under £300.
Celia

A I feel as if I've spent all January battling with an umbrella that has a 
mind of its own. You've hit upon the right answer: raincoats. But don't think 
high fashion. Most designer macs are hoodless and made from fabrics that aren't 
properly waterproofed. I'd recommend Australian label Driza-Bone, which 
specialises in durable rain- and wind-proof outerwear (
www.drizaboneclothing.co.uk <http://www.drizaboneclothing.co.uk>). Look at the 
fantastic ladies' riding coat, which is long, with a hood, for £134.95. If 
you're in London and would like to browse, visit Mackintosh's flagship store in 
the Burlington Arcade to see some beautiful and functional rainwear - though 
the Mackintosh riding coat is £595 (www.mackintoshrainwear.com 
<http://www.mackintoshrainwear.com>); and Peter Jensen offers a modern twist on 
the classic mac (£270, from the Shop at Bluebird, 020 7351 3873). But if you 
want to look chic and stay dry for less than a tenner, you won't go wrong with 
a Muji Freecut raincoat (www.mujionline.co.uk <http://www.mujionline.co.uk>) - 
a lightweight raincoat for £9.95 that you simply cut to the size you want.

·  If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
