
I am in my 30s and have suffered since my teens from occasional bouts of 
severe depression during which I have suicidal thoughts. I am happy with how I 
manage my mental health. I take my medication, see my doctor regularly, contact 
her if I feel wobbly, take exercise, have undertaken talking therapies, and 
know to ask for help when things get bad.

When I am in a dark hole, I often think about my father, who suffered from 
severe depression. I was 13 when he first told me that he fantasised about 
killing himself. He would describe, in detail, how he would do it. This was 
coupled with big mood swings; he could be the most fun and sweet person, but 
also angry and scary. There were instances when I was growing up when he would 
use his physical size to threaten or scare me: for example, holding me by the 
throat at the top of the stairs, driving the car into oncoming traffic. He 
never hit or really hurt me; I think he was just out of control in those 
moments. He was charismatic and, weird as this sounds, I hero-worshipped him.

When I was in my 20s, my father killed himself. It was a devastating event, 
but not entirely surprising. I have been through lots of different stages of 
grief, but lately I have this strange sense that the idea of suicide as a 
viable option is something deep-rooted in my psyche. I feel terrified when I 
feel suicidal. I don’t think I would ever go through with it – I am a mother 
and more than aware of the consequences for my loved ones. It is one of the 
reasons I take my mental health so seriously: to set a good example to my 
children.

I can’t imagine sharing my suicidal thoughts with them – it would be wildly 
inappropriate. I can understand intellectually that mine and my father’s fates 
are not entwined, but can’t shake the feeling that I am destined for failure 
and unhappiness.

After my father died, I had a short correspondence with his therapist, who 
ventured that, if I wanted any help in the future, I would be welcome to 
contact him. I feel as if he might be able to give me some answers. If I am 
really honest, I want someone who knew how complex, awful, wonderful, clever, 
funny and tragic my father was to tell me that it is no wonder I struggle. I 
also wonder if he might offer me some insights into my father that I had not 
considered.

It is almost as if I feel that, if I could understand more, I could untangle 
myself from my dad’s influence. Conversely, sometimes I think I should just try 
to move on, accept the unknowable and focus on my own wellbeing. Perhaps I have 
already spent too long worrying about my dad.

Children try to find the best in their parents, but what he did to you was 
trauma-inducingly terrible. I’m so sorry you had to go through that. To discuss 
the intricacies of his suicidal thoughts was inappropriate, indulgent and 
sadistic. It is no wonder you struggle. But look at how well you are doing: you 
have amazing insight, self-awareness and a sense of boundaries.

I contacted a psychotherapist, Naomi Stadlen, who said your fear of doing the 
same as your father was actually helpful. Your fear keeps you separate. She 
pointed out that you said, “I feel terrified when I feel suicidal,” whereas (in 
your longer letter) you said your father wasn’t afraid of dying.

Stadlen also noticed that you mention an intellectual understanding of not 
being “entwined” with your father and wanting to “untangle myself from my dad’s 
influence”. What is difficult, she said, is to recognise how often your father 
treated you in frightening and un-fatherly ways, without losing your sense that 
he loved you. He has left you with confusing memories that need disentangling.

How you untangle yourself is by talking. I wonder if you can reaccess the 
talking therapy you had (or if you still have it). “Talking,” stresses Stadlen, 
“would support you as a separate person from your father.”

It is so common for people who have suffered at the hands of a mentally ill 
parent to fear they will repeat things, but the fact that you areso aware, 
while hard for you, is useful for your family. You have a good and extensive 
support network, you can and do ask for help: all positives.

Stadlen wondered where your mother was all through this? You don’t mention 
her, or any siblings.

I wondered if you felt there was no other conclusion to depression than 
suicide because that is what you have seen. But, as Stadlen points out: “It’s 
possible to be sad and depressed without killing yourself. Failure and 
unhappiness are normal.”

As for your dad’s former therapist, don’t contact him. He won’t – can’t – give 
you what you want. For him to discuss your father would be a breach of client 
confidentiality.

What you may be struggling with, suggests Stadlen, “is feeling guilty. When 
you feel suicidal you may feel closer to your father. What can be difficult is 
feeling more like your separate self because that can feel like being disloyal 
to him.”

None of what happened was your fault. Your dad chose his path, your path is 
different – entirely different.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 (calls are free). In 
the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In 
Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in 
other countries can be foundhere 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.

Your problems solved

Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or emailannalisa.barbieri@mac.com <mailto:annalisa.barbieri@mac.com>. 
Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
