
David Cameron should take a step back from the referendum campaign and let the 
remain camp prioritise new voices, the shadow defence secretary, Emily 
Thornberry, said, on a day of events designed to relaunch Labour’s campaign to 
keep Britain inside the EU.

At a Sure Start centre in Walsall, accompanied by a dozen senior female Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs, Thornberry said the prime 
minister’s view on the EU was already widely known, and others needed to be 
heard. “There are plenty of good people now who can make the case; we really 
don’t need to keep hearing from David Cameron,” Thornberry said. “Plenty of 
women!”

Earlier the former prime minister Gordon Brown made a speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-live-labour-remain-campaign-final-10-days-vote>
 aimed at convincing Labour voters to turn out. He spoke of the “rows and rows 
of graves” at the Somme and Ypres in a passionate speech and said that Europe 
had been at war in every generation but ours, calling on those in any doubt 
about the continent’s history to reflect on the Berlin Wall and Warsaw ghetto.

Related: EU referendum: leave takes six-point lead in Guardian/ICM polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/13/eu-referendum-leave-campaign-takes-six-point-lead-in-guardianicm-polls>

“What sort of message can we send to the world on 23 June if we, Britain, who 
consider ourselves one of the most internationally minded, who consider 
ourselves outward-looking and engaged, decide to walk away from our nearest 
neighbours?

“This is not the Britain I know, this is not the Britain I believe in, this is 
not the Britain we should aspire to be. We should be a leader inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and not leaving it,” said Brown 
at a speech at De Montfort University in Leicester.


He admitted that globalisation had left people behind, including in Labour 
constituencies, but he refused to tackle specific questions about immigration, 
instead accusing media outlets including the Sun and BBC of having “an agenda”. 
Brown was heckled by one journalist calling on him to answer the question. He 
insisted his party was playing its role.


“Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell working with my old friend Peter Mandelson 
shows that something is happening,” he added.


In Walsall Angela Eagle <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle>, 
the shadow business secretary, said she felt the campaign was “on a knife edge” 
and, though unwilling to tell the prime minister directly to give way to Labour 
voices, Eagle said his TV appearances “do not help with the Labour vote”.

“It would be helpful. We are trying to get our messages heard above the 
general psychodrama of the blue-on-blue attack. This whole thing is about Tory 
big beasts having a battle like rutting stags, but it’s far more important, 
this vote, than any of that.”

Many of the MPs in the inner cities said they had an easier job convincing 
voters to vote to remain, but traditional Labour voters in the smaller towns 
like Walsall were leaning towards voting out.

“It is tough, to be honest,” said Emma Reynolds, the Wolverhampton North East 
MP. “The Tory argument is that staying protects the NHS, protects services, but 
they [voters] are seeing their services cut now, they are not feeling the 
economic benefits of the status quo. So they think they can now vote for 
change.”

Eagle said she agreed it was not just the issue of immigration which pushed 
voters toward a leave vote, but also a general feeling of frustration and 
impotence. “It’s a visceral us-and-them thing, not only immigration at all … 
the feeling is: ‘Why doesn’t anything change? How can we make things better?’ 
When you explain the figures though, then it’s different, but you can’t explain 
it to 65 million people.

“That’s why I said: ‘Get that lie off your bus’ [about the £350m-a-week to the 
EU slogan on the leave campaign bus]. It’s a lie. And it’s being done by a 
cabal of rightwing Thatcherites who don’t want to save the health service and 
don’t give much of a damn about public services in this country, so for them to 
campaign as if they do is fundamentally dishonest.”

The immigration pledge made by the Tories of reducing net migration to tens of 
thousands is a common refrain, however. “The Tories should never have made that 
pledge,” Reynolds said. “You do have to listen to people’s concerns about 
pressures on services but argue also that the government can do more to make 
sure they get a school place or a GP appointment.”

Taslima Rahman, a local mother canvassed by a trio of MPs at the talk, said 
she had been convinced to vote remain by the argument over public services. 
“It’s safer, I think, for jobs, for the future, I want to feel part of Europe, 
I think it gives us freedom,” she said.


But several other women at the centre, though happy for the MPs to build Lego 
models with their young children or play brightly coloured xylophones, were 
less keen to talk politics. A couple said they were unlikely to vote at all, 
citing cultural issues or lack of interest.


Though most of the MPs acknowledge a difficult generation divide, with older 
voters more likely to vote leave, the Birmingham Yardley MP, Jess Philips, said 
she believed arguments about public services were most likely to win over 
undecided voters in Labour heartlands.


Philips said her constituents “have lost so many services already, it’s not a 
doom on the horizon, it’s a reality for them. This centre will have had at 
least a third of its funding cut already.”


Shabana Mahmood, her fellow Birmingham MP, said families she spoke to were 
nervous about losing even more. “It is really mixed, yes, but the argument that 
cuts through is services. If the economy tanks again, they say we’ve already 
lost so much, what else is there left to lose?”

After boarding the red battle bus, the next stop was the headquarters of SCC, 
the Birmingham technology company which has offices across Europe.

In front of an audience of female employees, the founder, Steve Rigby, made a 
impassioned appeal for a remain vote, saying the implications of a possible 
Brexit had already been felt in the last two months’ trade.

“We believe we will feel the effects not just in the short term, but in the 
long term as well,” he said, adding that it was otherwise unprecedented for the 
company to make its political view known to staff.

At the lunch tables in the canteen, however, the view from female employees 
who chatted to the Labour MPs was far more mixed. The words on their lips were 
immigration, Turkish membership and the alleged £350m-a-week cost of the EU – 
three of the leave campaign’s core messages.

And while the company management was concerned its operations abroad would be 
affected if it left the EU, employees wondered if Brexit would mean those jobs 
in Europe could then return to British workers.
