
When the Second City <http://www.secondcity.com/> celebrated its 50th birthday 
this week, the star-power on hand for the party was breathtaking: Martin Short, 
Steve Carell, Fred Willard, Bonnie Hunt, Harold Ramis, Jim Belushi . . .

This virtual who's who of North American comedy underscored the outsized 
influence exerted by the little cabaret theatre on Chicago's North Side. 
Between it and its offshoot in Toronto, the Second City has been responsible 
for populating many of theSaturday Night Live 
<http://www.nbc.com/saturday-night-live/> casts, the 1970s cult TV hit SCTV, 
and all manner of films, from Animal House to The 40-Year-Old Virgin.

Yet for all the names that list Second City on their resumes, it is, at core, 
a theatre, a living space where audiences pay $20 or $25 to see tightly crafted 
sketch comedy revues developed through improvisation. And if they happen to 
spot the next John Belushi or Tina Fey on stage, so much the better.

The current revue, The Taming of the Flu, runs every night but Monday, with 
two shows on Friday and Saturday. A second company, the Second City Etc, mounts 
a separate show on a different stage from Thursday to Sunday.

Although the theatre is firmly established on the tourist agenda, the tour 
buses and concierges haven't taken over: audiences are still about 50% local, 
according to Andrew Alexander, the chief executive and owner. "The growth of 
the Second City has reflected the growth of Chicago and how much more 
cosmopolitan it has become," he said. "As the world has become smaller, our 
comedy has become more global."

Born as an offshoot of the Compass Players (which gave the world the 
Mike Nichols and Elaine May comedy team), and named after a derisive dismissal 
of Chicago in the New Yorker, the Second City connected with audiences 
immediately because it gave a platform to political and intellectual humour in 
a country coasting on post-war prosperity.

It was a theatre in a coffeehouse then, where the likes of the actor, director 
and musician Alan Arkin took the stage to do arch satires of mainstream 
conformity, and where Sheldon Patinkin – the man who would be director through 
much of the 1960s – started out managing the bar.

Now, of course, it's a juggernaut, a "comedy empire", in the words of the New 
York Times. The theatre not only presents shows, it'll do corporate 
engagements, it trains actors through classes in Chicago, Toronto and 
Hollywood, and it helps its performers stage specialised shows of their own. 
And it will, with shocking regularity, let loose another superstar or two.
Steve Johnson
Steve Johnson writes about entertainment and popular culture for the Chicago 
Tribune.
