
The dilemma I’m in my 50s and female. I have been sexually active with men 
only, but I had a strange feeling with a girl when I was 14. I was so jealous 
if anyone talked to her or got close to her. I never saw her again but I think 
about her sometimes. Years later, in my late 40s, I saw a woman in town who was 
very beautiful. I couldn’t take my eyes off her and felt jealous that I wasn’t 
sitting with her. Girls that look like guys are my type. I like a man’s face 
but I’m not keen on “down there”, and I love a woman’s body but don’t want to 
kiss her. I have just started to watch porn and it is creating fantasies about 
whether I could have sex with a woman. But I’m terrified. Am I bisexual?

Mariella replies Who knows, maybe? Deep down most of us are sexually far less 
defined than society allows us space to be and it’s certainly not something to 
be afraid of. Considering what a desperately short time we have to live out our 
lives and all the experiences we need to pack in before we’re dead and buried, 
it’s a miracle we stand still long enough to define our tastes in anything.

It’s a credit to human restraint that we’re not bingeing uncontrollably on 
what the world has to offer from the moment we’re able to stand on two feet. 
Perhaps that’s what being a teenager is all about.

The more I think about it, the less sensible it seems to limit ourselves by 
defining likes and dislikes, as though such dead ends were good life goals. 
What makes “knowing what you like” a positive quality? Confusion may be seen as 
anarchy by some – but isn’t it also freedom?

If you’re unsure where your tastes lie, it frees you up to experiment and 
perhaps ultimately achieve a more stimulating life. And once you’ve had great 
experiences, isn’t the clever thing to do to go back and see how much deeper 
you can mine them for further kicks, too?

I went to see U2 at the 02 in London the other day. They’re a band I’ve known 
since we were teenagers in Dublin, and I found myself transported – not just by 
the songs and the brilliant show, but the fresh strands they’ve dug out of old 
narratives: the further strata they’ve uncovered simply by conducting deeper 
personal excavation.

Bearing in mind that like you and me the band are well into the second phase 
of life, it seemed to offer a good model for living: digging deeper, expanding 
your repertoire and not just going through the motions.

More people come out in their 50s than at any other age, so you’re in the 
right decade for taking risks

This idea we nurse of standing still, or of spending a brief period 
experimenting with what’s available on the experiential side of existence, then 
narrowing it down to personal taste, is very strange. I struggle with the 
concept that we are so fixed as individuals that acting “out of character” 
exists as a recognisable concept. Character is hopefully a fluid, 
ever-evolving, ever-changing state of being. Our ability to feel empathy and 
our hunger to expand our horizons are glories of our species, and we can 
transcend any number of extraordinary tests and trials if our heads are open 
and our hearts are engaged.

If I had a pound for every person who’s been taken by surprise by a friend or 
family member doing something unexpected, I’d be a rich woman. Yet instead of 
embracing such expansion of personal boundaries as a natural and advisable 
thing to do, or considering whether maybe we’re the weird ones for having set 
expectations, we continue to think that others are somehow transgressing when 
they do something different.

You mention how your recent embrace of pornography is creating an appetite. I 
wouldn’t place too much credibility on that response in isolation. Pornography 
is designed to be sexually stimulating, so acknowledging its influence is like 
admitting that advertising made you want an Aston Martin.

Nevertheless, more people do come out in their 50s than any other age group, 
so you’re definitely in the right decade for taking risks. As I said the other 
week, there’s credible research from the likes ofEnders Analysis 
<http://www.endersanalysis.com/> and High50 <http://www.high50.com/> that if 
you want to catch people acting “out of character”, you should keep a close 
watch on them past their 50th.

I’d stop fretting if I were you. As a mature adult there’s no better time to 
push the boundaries of what, to date, have been the limits of your experience. 
Next time you see a beautiful stranger to whom you feel an attraction, act on 
your impulses, without fear.

Rather than trying to decide whether you are bisexual or heterosexual or 
homosexual, how about you just resolve to follow your feelings, expand your 
horizons and grab life as it presents itself, not as it’s been prescribed? 
Enjoy yourself; we’re not here for ever.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>
Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>

• The photograph with this article was changed on 9 November 2015. An earlier 
version showed two girls walking hand in hand.
