
I left school in 2009, the year before university fees rose dramatically. In 
my final year at school, people seemed to think that choosing a university 
course was the biggest decision anyone would make in their lives, and when I 
told my tutor that I wasn’t going to university, she stopped talking to me. Not 
only was I no longer of interest as I didn’t contribute to the school’s 
targets, but she was probably also struggling to work out how to advise me on 
what my next step should be.

When I started my job hunt, every single entry-level job I looked at said that 
a degree was mandatory. I felt incapable, like I had made a huge mistake. How 
would I ever get a job if they wouldn’t even give me a chance to send them my 
CV? My mum encouraged me to ignore the minimum requirements and apply anyway, 
and although I’m fairly certain the majority of places simply chucked my CV in 
the bin, I began to learn how to adapt my cover letter to get myself noticed. I 
started to research companies I wanted to work for, finding email addresses of 
people I’d like to work with and contacting them directly.

The process of being ignored and discriminated against ultimately made me more 
determined, something I believe is responsible for my career success. For many 
people however, I’m sure it has the opposite effect, which is why I’m entirely 
supportive of companies such as Penguin and Ernst & Youngscrapping a degree as 
a job requirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/18/penguin-ditches-the-need-for-job-seekers-to-have-university-degrees>
.

Getting through the door was just the first hurdle. Even after I found my 
first job, it felt like I was asked about what university I went to or what 
degree I’d studied on a daily basis. The most common reaction when I said I 
didn’t have a degree was outright bemusement. In some cases people seemed to 
view me as less intelligent, and a male director once told me that I’d never be 
able to get far in my career, because without a degree people wouldn’t take me 
seriously.

A male director once told me that without a degree people wouldn’t take me 
seriously

But, thankfully, I also had numerous supportive mentors along the way. Early 
on in my career I learned how to approach people I looked up to – asking them 
for coffee or lunch to hear about their path to success and see if they had any 
advice for me. Building these relationships was the most important thing I did 
in my early career. The network of people I built around me showed me the 
potential options open to me; they spotted skills I didn’t realise I had and 
encouraged me to put myself out there and take risks.

People started to trust me and at every given opportunity I’d jump at the 
chance of taking on more responsibility. By the age of 21, I was managing a 
team and dealing with more than 50 clients. The volume of people I had to 
communicate with on a daily basis improved my ability to put my point across 
eloquently – another skill that has been invaluable to my career. My manager at 
the time encouraged me to read as much as possible; he had a rule of rotating 
his reading between non-fiction and fiction, and I still follow this rule 
today. Reading extensively helped build up my vocabulary, my general knowledge 
and understanding of the world, and my creativity.

I’m now more thanr six years into my career and I’ve worked at the Guardian, 
Comic Relief and now FutureLearn <https://www.futurelearn.com/>, a company 
whose mission is “to pioneer the best social learning experiences for everyone, 
anywhere”. I’ve also started a series of blog posts and events 
<https://medium.com/starting-out> to help other young people beginning their 
career, and a few months ago I decided to study towards a master’s degree.

I’m not studying because I feel I need it for my career; I’m studying because 
I feel like I’m finally at a point where I can and I want to. For me, the key 
to a happy career is making decisions for yourself and choosing to do things 
the way you want to – even when it doesn’t seem like the obvious choice.
