
Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> will try to 
heal divisions among Labour MPs on Monday, after better-than-expected election 
results failed to quell doubts about his leadership from sections of the 
parliamentary party.

He plans to address Monday evening’s meeting of the parliamentary Labour 
party, alongside the new mayor of London,Sadiq Khan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, who was forced to deny on 
Sunday that he had an eye on the Labour leadership himself, after appearing to 
criticise Corbyn’s electoral strategy.

Asked by the Guardian if Corbyn should lead Labour into the next general 
election,Khan <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> said: “The 
Labour movement can only improve people’s lives by winning elections. The last 
time we won a mayoral election was 2004. The last time we won a big election 
was 2005 ... We don’t win elections by just talking to people who already vote 
Labour.”


The Labour leader’s allies hailed as fantastic the results of Thursday’s 
elections, in which they also took theBristol 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> mayoralty, remained the largest party 
in Wales and held on to key councils in swing constituencies such as Harlow.


Corbyn travelled to Bristol to congratulate the new mayor, Marvin Rees, whose 
unexpected victory, as a black man in a city whose riches were built on the 
slave trade, is viewed as a significant political milestone.

Related: Marvin Rees’s triumph as mayor defies Bristol’s racist past | Simon 
Woolley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/08/marvin-rees-bristol-mayor-racist-past>

The Labour leader said the election results showed his party was holding on, 
with support for it growing. However, sceptical MPs have said they believe the 
performance was not enough to build a majority in 2020, which will require what 
Khan called a “big tent” strategy, to win over Conservative supporters. There 
is deep concern about the result in the Scottish parliament, whereLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> slipped into third place, behind 
the Conservative party.

Following Khan’s 14 percentage point victory over Zac Goldsmith – the biggest 
in a mayoral election since 2000 – he said it was not for him to advise the 
party’s leader on how to win seats in other parts of England,Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and Wales, but added: “I don’t believe 
in heroic failure. I believe in winning elections to change people’s lives for 
the better.”

His comments may increase perceptions at Westminster that a new Labour power 
base is forming in the capital, with ambitions on the national party, but he 
moved to quell that, saying: “City Hall is not going to be used as a 
springboard for a challenge to the leadership or a coup or for me to give 
running commentary.Jeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has a big job to do as 
leader of the Labour party. My job is to be mayor of London.”

Separately, a report based on interviews with swing voters in the key 
parliamentary seat of Nuneaton and shared with the Guardian underlined the 
scale of the challenge facing Labour. In focus groups carried out by Ed 
Miliband’s former pollster James Morris, a panel of former Labour voters in the 
Warwickshire town said they viewed Corbyn as “old-fashioned” or “scruffy”.

Participants were unenthusiastic about the Conservatives and keen to give 
Labour a chance, Morris found, but many had a negative view of Corbyn.

Corbyn and his team firmly reject the “focus group politics” of the Tony Blair 
and Gordon Brown years, which they believe spawned a generation of “plastic 
politicians”.

But Morris and his co-author Ian Warren, another former Labour pollster, say 
the public’s inability to see Miliband as a potential prime minister was key to 
Labour’s loss of last year’s general election – and they warn that voters who 
are not firm Labour supporters appear to be even more wary of Corbyn.

The mood among the leader’s critics was not helped on Sunday when shadow 
chancellorJohn McDonnell <https://twitter.com/johnmcdonnellMP> sparked a public 
spat with the Blairite backbench MP Caroline Flint on Twitter, urging her to 
withdraw comments she had attributed to him about the local elections.




Khan spoke to the Guardian after his first official engagement, the Yom 
Hashoah Holocaust memorial service in Barnet, which signalled a clear attempt 
to distance himself from the Labour leadership’s handling of recent allegations 
of antisemitism inside the party, which included incidents such as Naz Shah MP 
suggesting that Israel’s Jews should be sent to live in the US and Ken 
Livingstone attempted to defend her by claiming Hitler had supported Zionism.

Khan said he planned to “hit the ground running”, holding meetings on Monday 
with the commissioner of the Metropolitan police, Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, the 
head of the fire service and with Transport for London.

“The key thing for me is to tackle the housing crisis,” he said. “I am 
bringing together an alliance of people from local authorities, housing 
associations, developers, those in finance to make sure we start building the 
genuine affordable homes we need. I have spent this weekend working on that and 
a number of other things.”

He said the alliance would change London’s overall strategic plan and publish 
new supplementary planning guidance, both policies that govern the amount of 
affordable housing that developers are obliged to build when they erect new 
private homes. He believes his pledge to tackle the housing crisis has allowed 
him to reach out to voters across the political spectrum.



Speaking following the Holocaust memorial service, the mayor said he had lost 
some Jewish votes “because of the antics of members of the party making 
comments that are clearly unacceptable and disgusting”.

Corbyn announced an independent review into antisemitism and other forms of 
racism in the Labour party, chaired by former Liberty chair Shami Chakrabarti, 
after suspending both Shah and Livingstone.

Khan was greeted warmly by members of the Jewish community when he arrived at 
a reception before the ceremony. He met the chief rabbi Ephraim Mirvis, 
Holocaust survivors and leading figures in the Jewish community, including 
Israel’s ambassador to the UK, Mark Regev, former Labour fundraiser Lord Levy 
and Eric Pickles, the government’s ambassador on post-Holocaust issues.


Henry Grunwald QC, chairman of the National Holocaust Centre, told Khan from 
the stage: “You have promised to be a mayor for all Londoners. By your 
attendance here today we hope that you are beginning to fulfil that pledge.”


With all but one of the local council results nationally announced by the end 
of Sunday, Labour had lost a net 24 seats – rare for an opposition party, but 
not as bad as many projections had suggested. The Conservatives lost 46 seats.


Corbyn will be able to introduce two new Labour MPs, Gill Furness and 
Christopher Elmore, after the party won byelections in Sheffield Brightside and 
Ogmore in Wales, held on the same day as the other polls.
