
The dilemma I am the godmother of twins born through artificial insemination 
with their father’s sperm and a US donor egg. The parents hid this from me, 
other friends and family. Being close to the mother while she was pregnant I 
felt sort of betrayed when I found out (by accident). The children, nearly 10, 
do not look like their mother and sense that something does not add up on a 
deeper level, too. Both parents and children have behavioural difficulties that 
I think might be partially resolved by coming out with the truth. By that I do 
not necessarily mean telling the children about how they were conceived, but if 
they stopped living that lie it might benefit the kids as well. Should I tell 
the parents what I think?

Mariella replies What do you actually think? It’s not particularly clear from 
your letter. I know a bit about what you feel, but it’s hard to see how 
expressing that will benefit your godchildren or their parents. Let’s backtrack 
a bit to that sense of betrayal you experienced when you discovered the truth 
of your godchildren’s biological beginnings.

What strange proprietary feelings you display over your friend’s body. The 
presence of babies growing in her womb without you being given full disclosure 
on how they got there seems to have rattled you at a deep level. Yet your 
presumption that this should have been shared is beyond the boundaries of 
normal friendship. It’s certainly nice to feel included rather than excluded 
from a friend’s secrets, but it’s by no means compulsory. The fact that they 
choose to keep what was no doubt a difficult and emotionally wearing struggle 
to conceive private makes them part of a large minority, I imagine. When there 
are children involved, the fewer people who know sensitive details the easier 
it is to control the flow of information through childhood.

I know the onus is on everyone to Facebook their lives nowadays, but there are 
still aspects of our existence that merit and warrant a degree of discretion. 
How children are conceived is sensitive information that would fit firmly into 
that category, in my book. How is it any of your business? Should they also 
have given you a blow-by-blow account of their procreative history leading up 
to the choice to look elsewhere for an egg? And why the US – surely there were 
perfectly good eggs available closer to home? Just think of all the details you 
could have chewed over had they only kept you informed.

Seriously, I’m not sure how relevant it is to anybody outside the family, and 
I certainly don’t think they should be under any pressure to come clean. 
Neither do you make clear why you think interfamilial behavioural problems must 
stem from that choice. It sounds like a presumption rather than a clear-cut 
case of join the dots, and much of the frustration seems to hark back to your 
sense of betrayal at being kept out of their loop.

It’s your position I’m finding the toughest to empathise with. If this couple 
really are close friends of yours and they are having problems with their 
children, then stepping in with some positive advice could well be welcome. But 
is that what you are suggesting? Taking it upon yourself to “out” their 
fertility solution, on the other hand, seems an unnecessary and aggressive 
complication. I’m wondering about your relationship with their mother and why 
you feel so sure that undermining her role in their creation will create 
blissful harmony where currently problems reign.

The benefits of constructive advice from well-meaning friends can’t be 
underestimated. On the other hand, deeply nursed grievances and complex, often 
irrational emotions form part of our emotional make-up. It’s up to each of us 
to distinguish which of those triggers, positive or negative, we are responding 
to before we spring into action. Certainly it’s hard to get the measure of a 
complicated situation in a few short lines and there may be much more to 
support your dilemma in the detail. On the basis of what you’ve outlined, 
however, I think you need to look to your own motivations before you start 
unpicking this family’s dynamic. Long-buried secrets are often the cause of 
angst, but we’re all entitled to have them. The only crime your friends seem to 
have committed was keeping you in the dark, and your complicated response 
provides some justification for their choice.

Good friendships aren’t quantified on the sole basis of intimate revelations, 
but on mutual empathy, support and pleasure in each other’s company. Can you 
tick all three of those boxes in all honesty when you cast your mind to your 
feelings for your friend? Think hard about the real factors leading to your 
long-running state of discord and unpick the muddle of feelings at the core. If 
you feel I’ve misjudged you, come up with some less emotionally myopic reasons 
for getting involved and then write to me again.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
