
I don’t know if this is true of every family, but in the one I came from, 
breakfast was a matter of unwavering routine, almost as if everyone had 
intelligently agreed that nothing before 8am should require complex 
decision-making.

I’m too skittery for a routine. This impatience goes well with a career of 
dreaming up new recipes, but poorly with just getting on with one’s morning, 
belly rumbling quieted, as would ostensibly be the goal of a weekday breakfast. 
Instead, I go through phases. For a few weeks, I’ll want nothing but 
fruit-filled breakfast bars that I can grab on my way to running errands and 
then I’ll want nothing but grandpa-style soft eggs, except I’ve replaced plain 
soldiers with over-the-top toast fingers with everything from herbs to butter, 
cheese and a slip of dijon. And, while my school-aged kid is fairly content 
with cold cereal, as his parents were before him, I am not so cruel a parent to 
deprive him of such wonders as pop tarts – although I do insist upon making 
them at home, if we’re going to have them at all. Way better than the 
originals, these have a flaky butter crust and any filling you can dream up, be 
it ambitious (homemade jam) or utterly kid- (cough husband-) pleasing, such as 
Nutella.

Boiled eggs with buttery herb‑gruyere toast soldiers

Serves 4 
4 slices of sourdough
4 tbsp unsalted butter, melted
1 tsp dijon mustard
Salt and black pepper
40g gruyère cheese, finely grated
2 tbsp parmesan, finely grated 
1 tbsp flat-leaf parsley, finely chopped
1 tsp thyme leaves, finely chopped
4 large eggs

1 Set the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 4. Cut the bread into 16 soldiers, then 
marshal the troops in a shallow, wide bowl. Whisk together the butter and 
dijon, then pour this over the bread. Sprinkle with salt, pepper, both types of 
cheese, parsley and thyme. Bake the soldiers for about 20 minutes, or until 
crisp and golden. Set aside.

2 Meanwhile, cook the eggs. Bring a medium pot of water to a steady boil. Add 
the eggs and cook them for exactly 6 minutes, maintaining the heat at a simmer, 
then drain and rinse them briefly in cold water.

3 Put the egg in an eggcup, crack open the top, and serve with a small spoon 
and the cheesy toast soldiers. Alternatively, you can peel them carefully, 
arrange on a small plate with four soldiers, then smash the egg lightly with a 
fork. Season and eat with a knife and fork.

Raspberry crumb breakfast bars

For the crust and crumb
190g all-purpose flour
190g dark brown sugar
120g rolled oats
¾ tsp salt
¾ tsp baking powder
½ tsp bicarbonate of soda
½ tsp cinnamon
170 g unsalted butter, cut into 3cm pieces

For the raspberry filling
50g dark brown sugar
1 tbsp lemon zest
½ tsp ground cinnamon
2 tbsp all-purpose flour
455g raspberries, fresh or frozen
60ml fresh lemon juice
2 tbsp unsalted butter, melted and cooled

1 Make the crust and crumb: Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Butter 
the bottom and sides of a 18x25cm glass or light-coloured metal baking pan. Put 
a long piece of parchment paper in the bottom of the pan, letting the parchment 
extend up the two short sides of the pan and overhang slightly on both ends. 
(This will make it easy to remove the bars from the pan after they have baked.) 
Butter the parchment.

2 Put the flour, brown sugar, oats, salt, baking powder, bicarbonate of soda 
and cinnamon in a food processor. Pulse in short bursts until combined. Add the 
butter and pulse until loose crumbs form.

3 Reserve around 170g of the mixture and set aside. Pour the rest of the 
mixture into the prepared pan and use your hands or the back of a large wooden 
spoon to push the crust into an even layer at the bottom of the pan. The crust 
should touch the sides of the pan. Bake until golden brown – 12 to 15 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack and let the crust cool. Keep the oven on while you make 
the raspberry filling.

4 In a medium bowl, whisk the sugar, lemon zest, cinnamon and flour together. 
Add the raspberries, lemon juice and butter and use your hands to toss gently 
until the raspberries are evenly coated.

5 Assemble and bake the bars: Spread the raspberry filling evenly on top of 
the cooled crust. Sprinkle the reserved crust mixture evenly on top of the 
filling.

6 Bake for 35 to 45 minutes, rotating the pan every 15 minutes, until the top 
is golden brown and the filling starts to bubble around the edges.

7 Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely, then cut into squares and serve. 
The bars can be stored in the refrigerator in an airtight container for up to 
two days.

Homemade pop tarts

Makes 9 tarts
240g all-purpose flour
1 tbsp sugar
1 tsp salt
225g unsalted butter, cut into pats
2 large eggs
2 tbsp milk

 For the cinnamon filling
100g brown sugar
1-1.5 tsp ground cinnamon, to taste
4 tsp plain flour

For the jam filling
225g jam
1 tbsp cornflour mixed with 1 tbsp cold water

Other filling ideas
9 tbsp chocolate chips/Nutella/ salted caramel

1 First, prepare your chosen filling. For the cinnamon mix, simply whisk 
together the sugar, cinnamon and flour. To make a jam filling, mix the jam with 
the cornflour and water in a small saucepan. Bring to a boil, then simmer, 
stirring, for 2 minutes. Set aside to cool.

Related: The recipe for a low-hassle brunch feast | Feasting 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/25/brunch-feasting-baked-eggs-with-spinach-and-mushrooms-recipe-deb-perelman>

2 Now, make the dough. Combine the flour, sugar and salt, then work in the 
butter with your fingers, pastry blender or food processor until pea-sized 
lumps of butter are still visible, and the mixture holds together when you 
squeeze it. If you’ve used a food processor, transfer the mixture to a large 
bowl. Whisk 1 egg and the milk together, then stir into the dough. Mix just 
until everything is cohesive, kneading briefly on a well-floured counter, if 
necessary.

3 Divide the dough in half. If you are ready to build the tarts, you can roll 
the pastry out now. Alternatively, wrap each half in plastic and refrigerate 
for up to 2 days.

4 Assemble the tarts: if the dough has been chilled, remove it from the 
refrigerator and allow it to soften and become workable, about 15-30 minutes. 
Put 1 piece of dough on a lightly floured work surface, then roll it into a 
rectangle about 3mm thick and large enough that you can trim it to an even 
25x35cm. Repeat with the second piece of dough. Cut each piece of dough into 
thirds along both edges to form 18 rectangles in total.

5 Beat the other egg and brush it over the entire surface of 9 dough 
rectangles. This will be the “inside” of the tarts; the egg is to help glue the 
lid on. Put 1 tbsp of your chosen filling into the centre of each of the 9 
prepared rectangles, keeping a bare 7mm perimeter around it. Put the fresh 
rectangles of dough on top of the prepared bases. Using your fingertips, press 
firmly around the filling, sealing all sides. Press the tines of a fork all 
around the edge of the rectangles. Repeat with remaining dough.

6 Gently put the tarts on a lightly greased or parchment-lined baking sheet. 
Prick the top of each tart multiple times with a fork; you want to make sure 
steam can escape, or they will become billowy pillows rather than flat toaster 
pastries. Refrigerate the tarts (they don’t need to be covered) for 30 minutes, 
while your oven warms up to 180C/350F/gas mark 4.

7 Bake the tarts: remove the tarts from the fridge, and bake them for 20-25 
minutes, until they’re a light golden brown. Cool on a rack. The sweet versions 
should keep at room temperature in an airtight container for a week. If you’d 
like to make them further in advance, freeze them unbaked between layers of 
waxed paper, and bake as you need.

Deb Perelman is a cook and food writer based in New York City. All recipes 
originally appeared on her blog,smittenkitchen.com 
<http://www.smittenkitchen.com>; follow her at @smittenkitchen 
<https://www.instagram.com/smittenkitchen>
