
The Alnwick Garden is the brainchild of Jane, the current Duchess of 
Northumberland. Originally a parkland created by local lad Capability Brown, in 
1996 an ambitious redesign began, culminating in the first phase opening in 
2002.

It is one of the country's largest new gardens for a century, with many 
elements, including a "poison" garden and one of the largest tree houses in the 
world. But it has not been without controversy: being a new design, the 
20th-century equivalent of Mr Brown was brought in, and it just so happened 
that he was Belgian. British noses were put out of joint when a lot of public 
funding went on bringing in Jacques Wirtz and his son, Peter.

Another contentious element is the central feature of the gardens, a cascade 
of 21 separate waterfalls with a few hundred computer-controlled water jets - 
it's on a huge, spectacular scale, but you could say it's a bit stark, with 
tonnes of concrete and not enough stone.

There are, however, some undoubted triumphs, such as the garden's backbone of 
miles of beech hedges, clipped hornbeams and yew. These provide a backdrop to 
the planting in spring, summer and autumn, and hold the whole thing together in 
the dead of winter. (Open all year, 01665 511350;alnwickgarden.com 
<http://www.alnwickgarden.com>)

The mellow brick walls surrounding the Ornamental Garden were brought to 
England as ships' ballast and were built in 1753. Now, they provide the 
backdrop for vines and climbing roses These Venetian gates were bought by the 
fourth Duke around 500 years ago, and have recently been fully restored and 
rehung A number of rills run out from a pool in the centre of the garden. Each 
is shallow and lined with stones to create a rippling effect. Clipped box 
hedges enforce the geometric shapes Rose beds to either side are backed by 
stately delphiniums in summer. Scent and colour are the main themes here, but 
the box hedges give the garden winter structure Framing a view is the oldest 
design trick in the book, and it need be no more spectacular than a few trees 
and a bit of sky
