
Although loads of people say that what we're doing here in the woods is their 
dream, just as many say that it would, for them, be an absolute nightmare. 
Knowing all the pros and cons of communal living, I can certainly understand 
both positions, but I'm usually more interested in the second reaction and the 
reasons for it. And the one that intrigues me most is the terror of sacrificing 
privacy.

Privacy is very much a modern sensibility: we obsess about "personal space" 
and so on. It's also a particularly English thing. Perhaps because of the 
climate, we imagine our homes as castles with metaphorical moats and we have no 
equivalent of the eulogised piazza or pueblo from warmer climes. Many people 
instinctively agree with Ayn Rand's line fromThe Fountainhead, published almost 
70 years ago, in which she suggested that "civilisation is the progress towards 
a society of privacy. The savage's whole existence is public, ruled by the laws 
of his tribe. Civilisation is the process of setting man free from men". But I 
think that's bull. It leads to an atomised society of lonely, isolated people 
who find that technology has become their most important, or only, social glue. 
The problem in contemporary society isn't privacy but ghettoisation.

Here it's the reverse. There are so many people around that privacy, and 
solitude, are precious and rare. That is actually one of the great advantages 
of communal living: one can always distinguish privacy from loneliness. If 
you're alone it's because you want to be; it's because you treasure your 
solitude and have sought it out. It's much harder, I think, to do it the other 
way: to live alone and occasionally put a dozen people together.

That's not to say we underestimate the value of privacy. We're slowly, almost 
inadvertently, devising ways in which we can protect our own and other 
people's. My wife Francesca and I are lucky inasmuch as we have a (mostly) 
private language: we resort to Italian when we want to chat between ourselves. 
We try not to do it too much because it would be excluding, and it's not 
something we do to slag people off, but it makes a huge difference just to have 
that subtle, verbal intimacy in a crowd, even for five minutes.

We also realised pretty quickly that privacy needs well-defined boundaries: 
we're fortunate that the layout of the house is such that people can do what 
they wish even though we shut up our own front and back doors between 9pm and 
8am and hunker down as a family. We don't, thankfully, share our family 
bathroom or the upstairs rooms. I usually get up incredibly early just to have 
time to myself. There are other, simple basics such as creating a guest account 
on the house computer so that no one is rifling through other people's files.

And I think having ritual sessions of silence throughout the day really helps. 
Just going to the chapel to sit in silence – be it for prayer or mediation – 
enables some of us to withdraw for a while, to step back from the bustle and 
find some calm. I suspect that one of the (admittedly minor) reasons that 
monastics have so much silence woven into their daily lives is that it 
guarantees one's own integrity in a crowded cloister. And I've often noticed 
that long-established, well-balanced communities are full of people who are 
reticent, quiet, almost taciturn; quite the opposite of the gregarious, 
eager-to-hug types found on more zany terrains.

And yet, having said that, I'm sure there are many people for whom the loss of 
privacy would be too great. We've got a mate who always says to us that he 
could never live in any community because he's an introvert, and I've often 
thought about that. Because I personally really wouldn't want to live in a 
community, or even an "extended household", in which the only people present 
are outgoing extroverts. If a group is to be plural and balanced and truly 
open, it should be able to make introverts, the quiet contemplatives and the 
socially timid, feel welcome and at ease. The degree to which we're able to do 
that will be a mark of our success or failure in years to come.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
