
My friend Bob Askew, who has died aged 68, was born at the south London 
address described by Julie Myerson in her book Home (2004), an account of the 
Victorian terraced house that later belonged to the writer – 34 Lillieshall 
Road, Clapham.

His parents, Peter, a grocer, and Phyllis, a shop assistant, soon moved, and 
Bob grew up in Croydon, south London. The eldest of three siblings, he passed 
his 11-plus despite the strain on the family of his mother’s ill health.

At John Ruskin grammar school, Croydon, Bob achieved both academic and 
sporting success, going on to study economics at Manchester University and 
making his home in the city where he was happy for the rest of his life. As he 
told Myerson, “I don’t often leave Manchester, if I can help it.”

During the summer of 1969 Bob was appointed to teach economics at the 
Manchester College of Commerce, soon to become part of the Manchester 
Polytechnic. He found himself with the largest timetable in the Department of 
Economics and so began a lifetime of trade union activity. He was also a keen 
member of the staff football team, Aytoun Wanderers.

He quickly became active in the Association of Teachers in Technical 
Institutes, the trade union for polytechnic teachers, emerging as a key figure 
in trade unionism at Manchester polytechnic. Bob was a dedicated polytechnic 
man in that he saw the primary purpose of higher education was to teach, and he 
made a deliberate decision not to research. He was a diligent and attentive 
teacher, highly thought of by his students.

Bob’s trade union activity at the polytechnic led him to represent the staff 
on both the academic board and the board of governors, and on the regional 
council of the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher 
Education, which had grown out of ATTI. He was hardly ever without a large 
caseload of members’ grievances, and while he was often in opposition to the 
management, there were also occasions when he worked with them. Bob could be 
pragmatic as well as principled.

In 1990 the branch had called a strike and he was on the picket line when news 
came that Margaret Thatcher had resigned as prime minister. Never had the power 
of Natfhe seemed so great: it felt as if Manchester Polytechnic Nafhe had seen 
her off.

When Bob retired he took up crown green bowling, which replaced trade unionism 
in his life after a move to Honley, west Yorkshire. In 1971 Bob married Carole 
Green, a secretary, by whom he had a son, Colin. After the couple divorced, he 
married Christine Sutcliffe, a teacher, who already had two sons, Daniel and 
Matthew. He is survived by Christine, Colin, Daniel and Matthew, and by three 
grandchildren.
