
I’ve never told anyone about this. When I was eight, I lived in a refugee camp 
and I was raped by a boy in his late teens. I still blame myself for what 
happened and I guess the reason that I never told anyone is I am afraid that 
they are going to blame me for it. He told me not to tell anyone and gave me a 
dollar. I was in shock because I remember how when a girl is paid for sex she 
is considered “a slut and a whore”. And I didn’t want to put anything bad into 
my family name. Sometimes I wish I could go back and stop myself. And also I’m 
afraid of telling my fiance.

Thank you for writing. It clearly took courage and I hope I can do justice to 
your bravery by offering you helpful advice. We should all be grateful to you 
for writing. Letters like yours have much to offer those of us who have been 
luckier and escaped the worst the world has to offer, reminding us that beyond 
our safe and comfortable lives there lies a parallel universe of chaos and 
violence where justice is a dream and human nature can be observed at its worst 
and at its best.

It’s all too easy, with so many channels and choices, to dodge exposure to 
anything we find uncomfortable – this is what mass entertainment exists for, so 
your story is a salutary reminder of what being vulnerable and far from home 
really means. The other day I interviewed the veteran war photographerDon 
McCullin <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/don-mccullin>, and his 
description of an encounter with a starving Albino boy in a Biafran refugee 
camp left few dry eyes in the room.

The photograph of that also eight-year-old child stared despairingly from the 
wall behind us. Don explained how the skeletal boy, clutching a licked-clean 
corned beef can, had followed him, slipping up behind him and sliding his bony 
hand into Don’s. This battle-hardened veteran of too many conflicts talked 
frankly about his feelings at that point, how he had to escape the camp, before 
he fell apart under the weight of guilt and sorrow the dying boy evoked. In 
today’s world, where hundreds of thousands of young children, forced to leave 
their familiar lives, are similarly in danger of violence and malnutrition, 
your letter reminds us that by failing to show compassion and kindness we’re 
abandoning our duty, and denying the gift for empathy that ultimately raises us 
above beasts.

I’m broken hearted by your story, because I know you are one in a million: 
that everyday vulnerable young girls and boys find themselves in situations 
they aren’t responsible for. You have nothing to be ashamed of and no idea yet 
of the relief you will feel when you find yourself able to discuss your 
experience. Such sexual violence has little to do with sex and is much more a 
symptom of powerlessness; a way for damaged individuals to establish a sense of 
control over a weaker being. You were a young child with no responsibility for 
the crime committed against you. In a different world, the one you inhabit now, 
where justice is a basic human right, you might have been given the tools to 
come to terms with your experience sooner. The first challenge is to shrug off 
shame; at eight years old you had no way to protect yourself. Even if you could 
rewind, as you say you wish to do, I don’t think you could alter your fate. 
Today you can stand proud as a survivor, a fantastic achievement in itself.

Now you need to take the next step towards a fully realised life, not just by 
going through the motions of daily living but by coming to terms with the past 
and shrugging off those debilitating feelings of guilt and shame. But you can’t 
do it alone. It’s time to seek help, meet fellow survivors and discover the 
fantastic support that exists out there for those with too much experience of 
the worst of mankind.

Explaining to your fiancé the reasons you struggle to communicate your 
feelings or trust others is a positive step for your future relationship but 
first seek professional help to give you the confidence and tools with which to 
rebuild your self-image and express yourself to those who lack exposure to your 
experiences (rapecrisis.org.uk <http://rapecrisis.org.uk/>; 0808 802 9999).

Friends and family can respond unpredictably to such cataclysmic moments in 
the lives of others; discomfort, a sense of helplessness and even feelings of 
redundancy are all too common. It’s important that along with understanding 
your own response to this crime committed against you, you are also educated in 
how to navigate its impact on those who love you. You are brave for having 
carried this terrible pain so close to your heart for so long, and wise for 
understanding that it’s time you share it in order to be able to live your life 
free of its shadowy presence.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<>

Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>

Please note: all comments on this piece will be subject to premoderation.
