
I hear it at least once a week: “To help our British wildlife we must focus on 
growing native plants.” It’s evangelised on gardening TV shows, in 
horticultural magazines and has even found its way into planning legislation. 
The one problem with this ubiquitous piece of science advice is that it really 
isn’t very scientific, and may even hamper your attempts to support local 
biodiversity.

The “native is best” hypothesis rests on three basic premises: first, that 
British wildlife is somehow a clear-cut group that is dramatically different 
from wildlife abroad. Secondly, our native plants are equally unique, with 
highly specialised adaptations. Finally, that these highly specialised 
adaptations create a perfect ecological fit, which renders non-indigenous 
plants measurably worse sources of food and shelter for local animals.

Yet in reality, the animals of the British Isles are all relatively recent 
exotic introductions. They are made up of the quick-footed invaders that 
managed to recolonise the area in the short geological window between the 
glaciers of the last ice age retreating and the melting ice caps flooding the 
English Channel, cutting us off from the continent. Rather than being highly 
specialised, these invaders are often generalists, capable of living in a huge 
range of habitats. Many of the most famous “British” animals have native ranges 
that span as far afield as the Canary Islands to Siberia and North Africa to 
East Asia. To many of these animals, an alpine meadow or subtropical swamp is 
just as “native” as British oak woodland.

A great irony is that much of the current advice recommends planting flowering 
plants of traditional cornfields. These might strike a nostalgic chord with 
gardeners, they might be beautiful and they might indeed be great for wildlife. 
But they are also invasive arable weed species that were only brought to our 
shores when the first farmers decimated native forest and replaced it with 
wheat fields. Because defining what is truly “native” is notoriously complex 
and largely subjective, we simply apply the label to things we happen to find 
attractive and emotive, regardless of origin.

Studies consistently show that the strictly native plants are not superior 
food sources for wildlife. Towards the end of the season, non-natives may even 
prove better food sources than many British species. Discrimination on this 
basis is a uniquely human trait. To animals, food is food.

The majority of garden plants in the UK are an amalgamation of the flora of 
six continents. So there is no reason for gardeners to limit their options. 
Aiming for the greatest diversity of flowering species, to provide the longest 
season of interest, is as good for pollinators as it is for people.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
