
Medical personnel who aided in the CIA’s first simulated drowning found that 
the detainee who endured it was probably willing to cooperate before his 
torture. They even mocked agency defenses of waterboarding as “creative but 
circular”, according to an extraordinary declassified document.

In an assessment devastating years of CIA and allied insistences that 
waterboarding was a critically important intelligence-gathering technique, the 
undated and heavily redacted document attributed to the chief of the CIA’s 
Office of Medical Services (OMS), states that detainee Abu Zubaydah’s 
cooperation with interrogators in 2002 “did not correlate that well with his 
waterboard sessions <https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/document/6541727>”.

The Abu Zubaydah waterboarding was the wellspring from which the CIA’s 
infamous former torture program, which it refers to euphemistically as 
“enhanced interrogation”, emerged. Contractor psychologists Bruce Jessen and 
James Mitchell,now the subject of a federal lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/22/cia-torture-victims-program-aclu-case-goes-forward>
, used it as a test case to implement a program they designed that yielded 
international human-rights condemnations and an extensive Senate committee 
inquiry.

Eighty-three times in the span of a month, CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> interrogators subjected Abu Zubaydah 
to waterboarding, a technique the body processes as drowning-induced 
suffocation.

But writing in “retrospect”, OMS concluded that Abu Zubaydah “probably reached 
the point of cooperation even prior to the August [2002] institution of 
‘enhanced’ measures – a development missed because of the narrow focus of 
questioning”.

That OMS conclusion bolsters the account of a former FBI official, Ali Soufan, 
who interrogated Abu Zubaydah in a secret Thai prison that spring. Soufan would 
later testify and write in a book, The Black Banners, that the CIA interfered 
with and ultimately scotched a promising and less-coercive interrogation of Abu 
Zubaydah – one that the landmark 2014 Senate inquiry found yielded intelligence 
on al-Qaida.

“Nothing changed in my statement. A lot changed in their statements. Now you 
know why my statement was the only statement under oath,” Soufan told the 
Guardian.

“From day one, I mentioned that CIA people who were there were as upset as me 
and left [the interrogation] before me.”

Joe Margulies, an attorney for Abu Zubaydah, said the document “confirms what 
we’ve been saying all along and shows what happens when amateurs are given 
authority over the nation’s security. Mitchell and Jessen were so certain they 
knew the answer before they asked the question that they couldn’t hear the 
truth even as Abu Zubaydah gurgled it from the board.”

The OMS official appeared to rebuke a “psychologist/interrogator” who “later 
said that waterboard use had established that AZ [Abu Zubaydah] had no further 
information on imminent threats – a creative but circular justification”. 
Mitchell hasadmitted to participating 
<https://news.vice.com/article/psychologist-james-mitchell-admits-he-waterboarded-al-qaeda-suspects>
 in Abu Zubaydah’s waterboarding.

The OMS official stated in the document that “only when questioning changed to 
subjects on which he had information (toward the end of waterboarding usage) 
was AZ [Abu Zubaydah] forthcoming.”

In December 2014, John Brennan, the CIA director, responded to the Senate 
inquiry’s conclusions that torture was ineffective and the agency had misled 
members of the Bush administration and Congress about its utility by saying it 
was ultimately “unknowable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/dec/11/john-brennan-defends-cia-torture-report>
” whether the agency could have yielded information from detainees without 
torture.

But the OMS official cited in the document goes further: “In any event, there 
was no evidence that the waterboard produced time-perishable information which 
would have been otherwise unobtainable.”

A CIA spokesman referred back to the agency’s 2013 response to a draft of the 
Senate report. It included the claim: “The Agency takes no position on whether 
intelligence obtained from detainees who were subjected to [torture] could have 
been obtained through other means or from other individuals. The answer to this 
question is, and will remain, unknowable.”

The document, and several others related to the torture program, were 
declassified on Tuesday after transparency lawsuits filed byVice News 
journalist Jason Leopold 
<https://news.vice.com/article/cia-black-site-conditions-that-led-to-detainee-death-laid-bare-by-report>
 and the American Civil Liberties Union.

Declassified portions of the Senate intelligence committee’s 2014 report found 
that Abu Zubaydah, severely wounded after his capture in March 2002, had 
cooperated with his FBI interrogators from his hospital bed. He identified 
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed’s role in the 9/11 attacks and provided the FBI with 
aliases for Mohammed, as well as other information.

But Abu Zubaydah’s CIA captors became convinced that the detainee was 
withholding information on active terrorist plots against the US – an 
assessment criticized by OMS in the document, which attributed it to a “narrow 
focus of questioning”.

The CIA would later falsely assert that Abu Zubaydah had “stopped all 
cooperation”, according to the Senate report. Senior CIA officials proposed 
subjecting Abu Zubaydah to a regimen, based on Mitchell and Jessen’s advocacy, 
of “learned helplessness”, which included waterboarding and other torture 
techniques. The torture was sufficiently severe that the Senate report found 
Abu Zubaydah would lie down meekly on the waterboard when his CIA interrogator 
“snapped his fingers twice”.

A different CIA document also partially declassified on Tuesday, dated weeks 
before Abu Zubaydah’s waterboarding and cited in the Senate report, stated: “We 
need to get reasonable assurances that subject will remain in isolation and 
incommunicado for the remainder of his life.”

The unnamed official explicitly states that the imminent torture could kill 
Abu Zubaydah and discussed destroying his body.

“In the event the subject dies we need to be prepared to act accordingly 
keeping in mind the liaison equities involving our hosts. If the subject dies, 
we plan on seeking … assistance for the cremation of subject.”

Abu Zubaydah, who lost an eye during his CIA captivity, currently resides in 
the Guantánamo Bay detention facility. Neither the Bush nor Obama 
administrations have been charged with war crimes.

Once approved by the Bush administration, the CIA treatment of Abu Zubaydah 
became a template for its torture of at least 118 other detainees, the Senate 
report documented.

Drawing on years’ worth of declarations by the CIA and its advocates that its 
torture program prevented attacks – which internal CIA assessmentsdo not support
 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/news/special-reports/iraq-intelligence/article24535840.html>
 – Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, has vowed to 
bring back waterboarding and “worse” torture techniques if elected.

“I think Trump can say whatever he wants to say. I really doubt that he will 
have people in the government excited to go down this path again,” Soufan said.

Abu Zubaydah attorney Margulies added: “Beware the demagogue who thinks every 
problem can be solved and every question answered with a good old-fashioned 
beating.”
