
A lion hunt in Sussex three months ago formed the subject of a charge heard at 
Chichester Police Court yesterday. The hearing stands adjourned until Friday.

Four defendants appeared on summonses; they were William Edmund Butlin, The 
Park, Skegness; Clifford Stanley Joste, Butlin's Zoo, Bognor Regis; Alan Leslie 
Proctor, Glamis Street, Bognor Regis, and John Weller Wensley, Church Farm, 
Pagham.

The summonses alleged that at the parish of Bognor Regis they had unlawfully 
conspired, combined, confederated, and agreed together to "commit a public 
mischief" and, by false statements, "to wit that a lion, which was being 
transported in a motor vehicle at the instance of you, William Edmund Butlin, 
had escaped and was at large" near Bognor Regis.

Mr Flowers, K.C., opening the case said that Butlin was a proprietor of 
amusement fairs and collections of animals. Joste was his manager, Proctor was 
a journalist, who at times apparently was a special correspondent of the 
"News-Chronicle," and Wensley was a farmer in the Pagham district.

Mr Flowers alleged that there had been "persistent lying to make the public 
believe a lion had escaped."

"In the early days of July," he said, "the defendant Butlin was moving one of 
his shows to Bognor. The animals apparently were coming from Skegness. In the 
early morning of July 5 inquiries were made at the police station with regard 
to the rumour that a lion had escaped. A police inspector went to Butlin's show 
and saw Joste and asked him about it. Joste said: "Yes, it escaped at Clymping 
at twelve o'clock last night. A box fell off the lorry and the lion got away. 
Butlin reported it to the police."

Mr Flowers said no report was made to the police. He then referred to a series 
of newspaper reports in which stories of the lion hunt appeared. One appeared – 
and was apparently sent in by Proctor – in the "News-Chronicle" on the morning 
of July 5. It was only in that paper that there was any report of the escape of 
the lion. In one report was the phrase: "Any minute we may hear the jungle 
roar." On July 6 a report appeared in the "News-Chronicle" headed "Great Lion 
Hunt. Holiday-makers armed with rifles."

Mr Flowers then read a report that "Rex, the forest-bred Nairobi lion," was 
captured in a field at Pagham after being at large for 36 hours. While this was 
going on the lion, he alleged, had never left Skegness, and did not get to 
Bognor until July 6.

He suggested that the motive was publicity for Butlin and Joste, whose show it 
was. On July 5 a number of people were in fear. Farmers were getting anxious 
about their cattle. Women and children were seeking accommodation at the police 
station. A school mistress would say that children were in a state of fear that 
day. Mr Flowers finally alleged that Proctor was "preparing the ground for this 
hoax upon the public" by paying a farmer to get a sheep killed.

[Click here 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2012/9/21/1348231200760/Lion-court-report-001.jpg>
 for the full court report. Billy Butlin was eventuallyacquitted 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2012/9/21/1348231172304/Lion-hoax-court-result-001.jpg>
 of the charges.]
