
We've had a great guy staying here for the past week: an itinerant spoon 
carver called Barn. He hitched here from London and rolled up looking just as I 
remembered him: wide braces over a woolly jumper, big beard and a big smile.

I met Barn more than a year ago in a wood in Herefordshire. He was the 
assistant to the green woodworking legend Mike Abbott and was teaching me, and 
a few others, how to make a chair. Since then he's got a so-called "peddler's 
licence" (for 17 quid from the West Mercia constabulary), a piece of paper that 
allows him to sit on any street corner and carve, and sell, his spoons.

What I like about Barn is his idealism: he doesn't sit on the streets because 
he's a drop-out, but because he's a true artisan who wants to share with 
ordinary people the beauty of his craft. He undercharges for his delicate 
spoons because he wants everyone to be able to buy one. Carving spoons, he 
says, is a way to "spread the love".

He wants, one day, to set up a sort of "spoon club" for schoolchildren so that 
they can learn knife skills and understand that knives can create real beauty, 
not just real menace. He talks about his idea of establishing a "pauper's caff" 
where hot, healthy food is served entirely on, or in, wood; where all the 
bowls, plates, spoons and chairs have been hewn by hand from trees. He's put 
his finger on what, I suppose, has always attracted me to wood as a material: 
it's so simple, so common and democratic. It's not exclusive, like silver or 
even ceramics. Anyone can find it and work it.

He stops with us for a week and is great company. We start each day sitting 
together in silence in the chapel, listening to the sounds of the geese and the 
wood pigeons. Barn is gentle but firm with the kids and is a huge help with all 
the work around the place. We spend a lot of the week just laughing. We all 
decide that he should come back and stay with us over the winter.

Each afternoon we sit and carve, creating a pile of shavings that the kitten 
and the kids distribute all over the place. My spoons are fat and lumpy 
compared to the smooth, slim models he creates with ease. When he puts 
a child's initials on a spoon, he does it by hand with a pick-knife, creating 
an immaculate bevel on the letters.

Barn's so used to sitting on the ground as he carves that we both sit on the 
floor while he teaches me more about sharpening and about various knife grips. 
It's obvious stuff if you think about it but I, like most people, have never 
thought about it.

Each night we offer Barn a bed in a spare room, but he pulls on his woolly hat 
and heads out under the stars. He's more at home in the woods. He's strung a 
tarp between a couple of hazels and sleeps happily out there each night.

His next project is to travel round Britain carving spoons in return for board 
and lodging and to write a book about it. It will be a sort of diary told 
through the people he meets and the spoons he makes for them. (If you're 
interested in a spoon or the book, we'll pass on your details to him.)

In the end Barn decides he has to get back on the road. I leave him at a 
nearby layby as he hitches towards Wales. When I look back and see the sign 
he's holding up, I notice that he's given the thick, marker- pen letters on the 
cardboard flamboyant serifs. That's Barn all over… unexpectedly stylish.
