
They solve problems

Many of Richard Branson’s best ideas come from personal frustrations. He 
started Virgin stores because he loved music but found record shops so boring. 
His record label came about because he found a great artist he couldn’t get 
signed to a label. And Virgin Airlines came out of his frustration with the 
experience of flying: rubbish food, uncomfortable seating and no entertainment.


Huffington Post founder Arianna Huffington anticipated the impact digital 
technology would have on newspapers and decided to create an online platform 
for good journalism that was free and available to all.


Simple ideas, but they solve peoples’ problems or adapt to change in the world.

They are resilient

Talent is important, but it isn’t everything. Most successful people have 
experienced failure and rejection in their time. The editor of American Vogue, 
Anna Wintour, said that getting sacked from Harper’s Bazaar was a turning point 
in her career. Richard Branson has had numerous business failures, including 
Virgin Cola, Brides and Cars. But what marks out winners is their ability to 
bounce back from setbacks and get back up when they’ve been knocked down. They 
also work incredibly hard.


There are many parallels in the world of sport. In the early days, Gary 
Lineker gave up his social life to concentrate on his football career. Gary 
Neville says his brother Phil - also a professional footballer - was the better 
player, but his dedication won him more England caps. And according to Eric 
Harrison, youth team coach of the Manchester United Class of ‘92 (which 
included David Beckham, Paul Scholes and Ryan Giggs), the best player in the 
team was Raphael Burke - someone many people haven’t even heard of. Harrison 
says he didn’t make it big because he lacked the focus and application of his 
teammates.


Perfection doesn’t exist - there is always room for improvement.

They have a winning mindset

While I was researching the book, I spent some time with Formula One teams and 
was completely blown away by their attention to detail, their use of data and 
their obsession with innovation. They have a mindset that says: “no matter how 
fast we go, we should have gone faster”. Successful entrepreneurs are exactly 
the same. Perfection doesn’t exist - there is always room for improvement.


I believe there is such a thing as a national mindset too. Ours is too 
negative. We have so many winning brands: Harry Potter, the Premier League, 
David Beckham, Team Sky, Andy Murray - even Fifty Shades of Grey, which 
although ridiculous on some levels is also a British success story - but there 
seems to be so much negativity. We shouldn’t be squeamish about wanting to win. 
It is one of the reasons I decided to write about winners - to celebrate 
positive people doing positive things in a way that everyone can hopefully 
relate to.


They are strategic thinkers

While it is widely accepted that sports people need to study the behaviour of 
winners – and get psychological support – to become winners themselves, the 
worlds of politics and business haven’t really caught up. But things could be 
changing; since my book came out, I’ve been inundated with requests to speak at 
business colleges, including Regent’s University in London, where I’m holding 
an official launch event.


Like top sporting minds, successful business leaders practise something called 
OST: objective, strategy, tactics. This is about setting a clear objective, 
devising the strategy, then taking the tactical steps needed. Even the guys who 
look like they’re laidback: Usain Bolt or Richard Branson - that’s exactly what 
they’re doing.

Winners and How They Succeed by Alastair Campbell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> is published by 
Hutchinson

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
