
Is there a place for religious international NGOs in the 21st century? The 
majority of students who responded toour question 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/dec/05/students-speak-religious-ngos-21st-century>
 said yes. They argued that religion was deeply rooted in many communities, and 
therefore it made sense for faith-based NGOs to work in those communities. 
Those who disagreed claimed religious NGOs attempt to convert the people they 
work with. Here are five of our favourite responses, and you can add your 
thoughts in the comments section below.

Religion has spearheaded social change

Yes. Religious NGOs play an important role as social service providers, and 
through their faith-based approach they have the ability to develop deeper 
relationships with communities in developing countries.Wendy Tyndale 
<http://www.palgrave-journals.com/development/journal/v46/n4/abs/1110486a.html>
, in her 2003 analysis of a World Bank survey that collected voices from around 
the world, found that “no other organisations are more firmly rooted or have 
better networks in poor communities than the religious ones”. This ability to 
foster deep connections in communities cannot be overlooked.


Yes, religion has in some cases led to extremism, but it also has spearheaded 
social change. For example, much of Latin America (where Christianity and 
notably Catholicism has had tremendous influence) has undergone rapid social 
changes with a view to the oppressed and impoverished throughliberation theology
 <http://liberationtheology.org/>. Liberation theology has its roots in Latin 
America and understands Christianity to operate with a “preferential option for 
the poor”. This change in theological understanding has brought the plight of 
the marginalised to the foreground.

Religious NGOs continue to have this ability to fight for the marginalised and 
combat extremism through representing different faiths under the golden rule of 
all religions: “Do unto others as you would have them to do unto you.” 
Religious NGOs need to continually reflect this and, if done faithfully, their 
ability to connect with communities and promote a positive message for the 
religious may be the best way in which to combat extremism and advocate for 
positive social change.

Adam Faber, Dalhousie University, Canada

Only secular NGOs can claim to be independent 

The complementary role that NGOs have in supporting and advancing development 
efforts is widely recognised, as assistance from locally based organisations 
and NGOs are given the difficult task of addressing poverty alleviation, social 
inequities and environmentally focused initiatives where governments’ and the 
private sector’s actions are simply falling short.

However, religious NGOs (especially evangelical Christian) are often a remnant 
of western colonialism and imperialism, as the primary goals of economic and 
political exploitation are pursued through manipulating attempts of conversion 
of faith. By entering a community and establishing a powerful base of converts, 
there is the potential to influence the educational system, economic 
activities, social policy, government bureaucracy, and even military affairs.

Of course, there are a plethora of examples where religious NGOs have 
accomplished fulfilling noble projects of improving human wellbeing, but the 
underlying foundational concept of converting the population to a given faith 
cannot be ignored. Such initiatives are nothing less than subversive tactics 
with the intention of changing cultures and communities to subscribe to a 
foreign ideology, so that ulterior economic and political motives may be 
pursued.

With the growing trend of religious fanaticism across a variety of faiths, to 
continue to promote the presence of religious NGOs in areas of potential 
religiously influenced conflict is to stoke an age-old battle of domineering 
dogmas. Therefore, if a humanitarian worker truly wishes to remain independent, 
then he or she must choose to work with a secular organisation. Otherwise, 
there will be undeniable pressure to persuade vulnerable people to convert.


Patrick Rulong, University of Waterloo, Canada

Faith-based NGOs attract more donations

Faith is a phenomenon that has shaped and molded the sociopolitical landscape 
for millennia. No other phenomena can illicit as big a response from a group as 
large and diverse and as quickly as faith can. This has had extremely ugly and 
devastating consequences as well as significant humanitarian benefits in modern 
history. In the context of humanitarian organisations, faith has been a 
double-edged sword. Often, faith-based humanitarian organisations have used aid 
as a pretext for spreading their faith, resulting in controversial programmes 
in which individuals are not given aid until they convert, as has been done by 
several controversial evangelical missionary organisations in Africa. This 
results in faith-based organisations being used as tools to establish cultural 
and religious imperialism. Furthermore, the bad actions of a few faith-based 
organisations causes deep mistrust and resentment by the local population that 
issometimes vented indiscriminately at foreign aid organisations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/19/deaths-aid-workers-world-humanitarian-day>
, as has been the case in Afghanistan and Pakistan’s Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
province.

However, in the modern era, many secular aid organisations such as USAid can 
be accused of similar corruption in goals as governments such as the United 
States government use them as tools of diplomacy and intelligence rather than 
for the intended goal of humanitarian aid. The US Central Intelligence Agency 
has been accused of using humanitarian organistions and programmes as fronts 
for its intelligence operations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/sep/05/pakistan-voluntarysector>. This came 
into light when afake hepatitis B vaccination programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/11/cia-fake-vaccinations-osama-bin-ladens-dna>
 in Pakistan was used to identify the whereabouts of Osama bin Laden.

In short, in the large pool of humanitarian organisations there will always be 
bad apples with corrupted goals, whether they be evangelical missionary 
organisations with the goal of religious conversion or western governmental aid 
agencies with the goal of serving the diplomatic and intelligence goals of 
their government. This will remain true regardless of whether organisations are 
faith-based or secular.


The key difference between secular and faith-based organisations is their 
ability to attract donors. While, in recent decades, secular humanitarian 
organisations have drastically increased their donor pools and funding 
resources, they cannot match the donations that faith-based organisations are 
able to procure speedily. Often, significant amounts of money donated to 
secular organizations are given by numerous small faith-based ones. The fact 
that charity is an important tenet in religions such as Islam and Christianity 
is a driving factor that causes individuals who would otherwise be apathetic to 
global humanitarian issues to donate to help solve such issues. In a world 
where individuals are increasingly apathetic about global humanitarian issues, 
faith-based organisations will have a much easier time fundraising for global 
causes than their secular counterparts. It is this key ability of faith-based 
organisations that makes them not only tolerable but necessary in the coming 
decades.

Noorsher Ahmed, Occidental College, US

Religious or secular – they both do inspiring work

Though some may feel that religious belief is a now defunct reasoning behind 
“good works”, no one can deny the massive impact it has had across the world 
over the centuries. I support the work of both religious and secular NGOs and I 
applaud the very difficult work these organisations do. The dangers faced by 
aid workers are similar, whether or not they are working with a religious group.

Although religious groups take different ethical and moral stances on issues 
such as sexuality, this should not (and, I believe, usually does not) prevent 
them from offering aid to all in need. Working in communities alongside 
different religions is a challenge, but an extremely rewarding one, and it can 
lead to greater understanding and increased trust between people. The world 
stage is now so crowded and wide that it is only necessary that we each learn 
about the other’s beliefs, while figuring out how to work alongside one another 
despite our differences. As a Christian and a medical student, I am very 
interested in becoming more involved in humanitarian work in the future. 
Whether this is with a faith-based organisation or a secular one, I know I will 
be doing my work with the same goals in mind: first, to love my God “with all 
my heart and soul and mind” and, second, to “love my neighbour as myself” 
(Matthew 22:37-40).

Sophie Gerring, University of Aberdeen, Scotland

Religious NGOs are fine, as long as they do no harm

This is an issue that we should regard from a pragmatist perspective. There 
are about a million difficulties that an aid worker can encounter when working 
in a cultural environment that is different from their own, from problems with 
language to accidentally offending people because customs are not known. This 
is not limited to faith-based NGOs, and in most cases the development work the 
NGO does makes up for the trouble it creates. It only becomes a real problem 
when they do more harm than good.

But if it turns out that an NGO does create an unacceptable amount of damage 
in a certain area, for example, an NGO discourages the use of condoms in a 
place where HIV is the main cause of death, it should get out. Not because it 
is faith-based, but because it does more harm than good. We cannot judge 
religious NGOs as a matter of principle; their effectiveness needs to be viewed 
on a case-by-case basis.


The only thing we can regard as a matter of principle is that we should not 
ban religion-based NGOs from places where people practise a different religion 
from their own. We do not want to impair people who want to do good because 
they have a religious reason for wanting to do so. This, in a way, would also 
be doing more harm than good because aid is denied where it could had been 
given. We need to have faith in religious NGOs.


Kim van Winkel, King’s College London, United Kingdom


Over to you – let us know your thoughts on religion and development in the 
comment section below. You can also enter this month’s Students Speak 
challenge, which asks: “Is social media still a campaigner’s best friend 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/07/students-speak-is-social-media-still-a-campaigners-best-friend>
?”
