
There are pretty flowers and folderols everywhere, soft cushions and 
soft-footed waiters. Coffee and little sugary biscuits are served. I take the 
coffee black and don't eat the biscuits, though I am breakfast-less. Sugar is 
anathema to New Yorkers, I know, and Judy Sheindlin is very New York, tiny, 
elegant, charming and wise-crackingly clever. I must want her to think well of 
me.

"Have a cookie," she suggests.

"No thanks," I say. It's not so much that I want her approval, I realise. I 
fear her disapproval.

Judge Judy is a TV show watched daily by 10 million people worldwide, most of 
them women, and after 12 years of public popularity and critical non-attention 
is into its 11th series for CBS and still going strong. Sheindlin acts as a 
latter-day Queen Solomon, to whom the people bring their grievances against one 
another, and as such she doles out swift and scathing justice, threatening to 
cut the baby in half to decide who is the real mother. As befits the century, 
it's done from a TV screen, not a throne, in the form of a reality-show small 
claims court, and publicists, not prophets, extol her.

"Being a TV star is a great gift," she says. "Everyone treats you royally. I 
started out in a two-room apartment in Brooklyn, and thought, 'Never again.' 
Now all this." And she gestures round the grandeur of London's Dorchester 
hotel, this mother of five, grandmother to 11, wife of a retired high court 
judge. Then she complains that she hasn't slept. She had to move rooms to get 
away from a faulty air-conditioner and spent the night on a sofa with a towel 
beneath and a towel on top. "Even though I am a star," she adds, "it's the kind 
of thing that still happens."

I say I know what it's like. However hard I try, I still end up toiling up 
some hill in the rain with a carrier bag in each hand and a toddler clinging to 
my legs, and she looks at me with pity: too much. For her, it would never get 
quite as low as that.

For 25 years Sheindlin was a "real" family court judge in New York, notorious 
for her fast decisions and wise-cracking judgments, appreciated as the scourge 
of villains and the friend of the oppressed. And then TV discovered her and she 
became a reality-show judge instead, bringing her experience and attitudes with 
her, as she roots out liars, exposes cheats and berates vandals. She believed, 
and still believes, that young offenders need a sharp shock. "Five per cent 
were real bad apples," she says. "The other 95% were just trying to survive the 
only way they knew. But that does not excuse them." She has no time for a 
liberal press that finds excuses for antisocial behaviour and so encourages it. 
Oddly, the "real" people who turn up for her judgments seem to concur: they are 
content to abide by Judy's decisions, no matter how they are humbled and 
exposed, or smirk or rage after the show. It may be, of course, merely that the 
production company pays the fines she imposes, so contestants - those accused 
of cheating on eBay, bullied at school, sued by their mothers, persecuted by 
ex-spouses, or whatever, seem eager enough to turn up. It is Jerry Springer 
without the schadenfreude or noisy vulgarity, The Weakest Link without the 
spite.

The Judge Judy show dominates the ITV2 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/itv2> 
midweek daytime schedules, or you can watch a selection of her Solomonic 
judgments on YouTube, where 10-minute chunks of her programmes are freely 
available.

The path from Brooklyn to Hollywood - in 2006 she became the 2,304th star on 
the Hollywood Walk of Fame - was scarcely of her making. It just evolved. She 
had a secure and happy beginning - she describes her dentist father as "the 
greatest thing since sliced bread" and her mother as "a meat-and-potatoes kind 
of gal". Only when her father died did she realise to what degree her mother 
was "the glue that kept the family together. But then most women are."

A bright, argumentative girl, Sheindlin went to a tough state school, on to 
New York Law School and in 1965 began to practise law in Manhattan. In 1972 she 
moved on to the family court, where she prosecuted juvenile delinquency cases 
for the State of New York. Her approach was simple, caustic and forthright. 
"Take responsibility for yourself, your actions and the children you bring into 
the world. No excuses."

By the time she was outed by the TV programme 60 Minutes as a potential star, 
she had sat through more than 20,000 family cases. She had learned how to get 
through to people. "You have to make them listen, and you have to talk sense, 
and then they'll hear you." It made sense to use these rare skills to speak to 
the masses through a TV courtroom, and not to the few individuals in a real one.

She is described as acid-tongued and brutally sarcastic, but I see no evidence 
of it. She is more like a busy mother, beside herself with anxiety for the 
welfare of a troublesome child. When she tells a recalcitrant male litigant, 
"You're nothing special! Believe me, I have three sons so I know. You are no 
gift - you're not even good-looking," it is done to bring him to his senses, 
before he gets into worse trouble, rather than in an attempt to humiliate him. 
And still they come back for more.

She is reassuring and funny, both stern father and anxious mother to an 
audience I suspect she sees as dumb and getting dumber, and in dire need of 
reform. She is all for the swift, sharp shock of punishment, seeing it as the 
only approach to juvenile crime that works. I protest that the US already has 
the highest rate of youth imprisonment in the world, second only to China. She 
looks at me with sharp, intelligent eyes. "So?" she says. "Get them early and 
get them hard. Then they won't come back. The choice is theirs."

Fortunately these days the wealth of Solomon accompanies the love of the 
people. In a recent survey of Hollywood's best-paid "talkers", Sheindlin came 
joint third on $45m, with David Letterman, behind Oprah Winfrey and Howard 
Stern. Indeed, she has just built herself a magnificent Versailles of a temple 
in Greenwich, Connecticut: 24,000 sq ft, 17 bathrooms, taking 400 labourers a 
mere 20 weeks to build, complete with fancy ready-made grounds transported 
thither in tubs. A Sims computer game construction for most of us, but for her, 
real. She impresses even herself. "The ceilings are higher even than they are 
here," she says.

She is a Brooklyn girl made good and does not forget it: high-powered, 
industrious, conscious of her responsibility. She believes celebrities must set 
an example: be like our Queen, not Britney's teenage sister - pregnant out of 
wedlock and setting a fashion for teenage pregnancies, which the tax-payer will 
have to support. She seems motivated less by ambition than by a genuine social 
conscience - she feels it would be immodest to claim 10 out of 10 for the 
latter. I award her a nine, inasmuch as in the UK, unlike in the US, we are 
suspicious of immoderate wealth.

I ask her about the election. She says it is touch and go. She is a friend of 
McCain - "a real meat-and-potatoes guy" - but likes Obama. He represents youth 
and hope and the capacity to trust, since no one knows anything about him. 
Everyone wants to vote for him - but in the quiet and secrecy of the voting 
booth, who knows what will happen? Caution may triumph over trust.

Different personalities seem to pop out of this tiny, graceful, powerful 
person speaking from the depths of her hotel armchair throne. Sometimes it is 
Mary Poppins, sometimes Supernanny, sometimes Barry Goldwater, the American 
politician known as Mr Conservative. She is "reactionary" in distrusting the 
liberal media, seeing it as having fostered the blame culture to the detriment 
of society, "progressive" in her approval of the feistiness of Michelle Obama.

Before we part, the photographer turns up and you remember this slip of a 
woman from Brooklyn is a star. There is a kind of focusing of energy here that 
the camera loves; so does she.

"Your top is uneven," tactfully murmurs her publicity guy. The black top has 
slipped over her shoulder to show a sliver of white.

"It is as I mean it to be," she replies sharply, and he quickly shuts up. She 
pulls the top down even further over her shoulder, and is instantly glamorous. 
She is right and he is wrong. It is this particular talent that has brought her 
to this point in life. She is everyone's tough but loving parent where parents 
are reluctant to be parents and want, disastrously in her view, to be buddies. 
Do what she says and you'll survive; defy her and you'll perish.

We have a picture taken together.

"I never know whether to keep my head up or down," I complain.

"Up," she says, "always up." I do as she says. Of course, she's right. 

Reality TV <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/reality-tv> - or 
semi-reality TV, as this is - is here to stay. We shouldn't complain: it is the 
people's choice. The producer's time has come. The contriver of the programme 
gets the glory; the writer and director are lucky if they get a mention. The 
cheaper daytime shows - property, cooking, lifestyle, courtroom - slop over 
into evening viewing. If we want information we go to the internet now, not a 
documentary. If we want drama there's the news and the goings-on of 
celebrities. If we want a stage not a screen we can go to a musical. The power 
of personality remains: Judge Judy has spawned a host of imitators, but none 
has her charisma, or her ratings.

A pity McCain didn't choose her, rather than Palin, for his running mate. Her 
idea of solving juvenile delinquency by having every woman implanted at birth 
with a contraceptive chip, to be taken out only on request, might cause some 
controversy. But one can see her point. At least every child born would be a 
wanted child, and not - as she sees it as being in the US - the result of an 
accident and a bottle of vodka.

She believes in the legal system. "All those good people huddling behind bars 
in gated communities - it's the wrong way round. The others should have the 
bars." And as I go she says, "It took them 13 years to get OJ Simpson but they 
got him. What goes around, comes around"

The 'idiot' teenager

A 17-year-old girl moves in with her boyfriend's family. She has a medical 
problem and is taken to hospital by the boy's mother, racking up significant 
bills. When the teenagers break up and the girl moves out, she and her mother 
refuse to pay. They are being sued for the hospital costs.

Judge Judy to defendant: Now, tell me about this episode that landed you in 
the hospital.

Defendant: I had a urinary tract infection.

JJ: You had a WHAT?

D: A urinary tract infection.

JJ: From too much sex?

D: No.

JJ: From WHAT?

D: I get them. It runs in my family.

[Some discussion of the case ensues, before Judge Judy concludes]

JJ: You are an IDIOT. And that's also probably congenital.

The eBay 'scammer'

Two women are suing an eBay trader, a mother of three, after they bought 
mobile phones from her online, but were sent only photographs of the goods. On 
calling the trader, they talked to her husband, who laughed at them and thanked 
them for the "shopping spree". Judge Judy is livid.

JJ to defendant: You're an idiot. And a scammer. You're a thief. Why don't you 
get a job? ... I'm older, smarter - if you live to be 120 you're not going to 
be as smart as

I am in one finger. Do you understand?

Defendant: I understand, but it's not true.

JJ: Oh yeah, it's true ... You have to find something constructive to do with 
your time, other than to make children who are going to grow up with no moral 
compass like their mother. Judgment for the plaintiff.

The 'disrespectful' ex

Watch a video of Judge Judy on the Jezebel website 
<http://jezebel.com/355249/judge-judy-teaches-wife-beater-to-have-respect-for-women>

A man is accused of assaulting his ex-girlfriend. He is being sued for damages 
but claims that he simply "grabbed her shirt and pulled her close to me". The 
defendant's mother is with him in court, and Judge Judy asks her to stand up so 
her son can demonstrate what he did. A few attempts later ...

JJ: All I'm asking you to do is show me on your mother how you grabbed her and 
pulled her close to you.

Defendant: I was trying and then you said it wasn't how I did it.

JJ: You didn't pull her close to you. You put your hands on your mother's 
shirt and then you leaned into your mother and said something to her.

D: If you want me to grab my mother's shirt and pull her close, it's not going 
to happen.

JJ: Oh, why not?

D: Because it's disrespectful.

JJ: Right on! And if it's disrespectful to your mother, it's disrespectful to 
the mother of your children! Case closed.
Kira Cochrane

• Fay Weldon's new novel, The Stepmother's Diary, is published by Quercus at 
£16.99. Judy Sheindlin will be on The Paul O'Grady Show today at 5pm on Channel 
4; Judge Judy is on ITV2, Monday-Fridays at 11am and 6pm.
