
I have a drinking problem. My problem is the things I am unable to drink: I 
cannot stand the taste of negronis. Yes, I know. First world problems and all 
that. Then again the first world is where I live, and right now, here in first 
world cocktail land, negronis really are the thing.

If the peach-red blushing negroni were a car it would be a gleaming vintage 
Mercedes convertible. That's too bloody small for me to fit into. Instead, it's 
a very bitter drink, probably invented in Florence around 1920 for a Count 
Negroni, made with sweet vermouth, gin and the foul, violent insult that is 
Campari. I'm meant to like it because grown-ups do. I don't. I don't like its 
bitterness in the same way I don't like having my corns sliced off. Drinking a 
negroni feels like punishment for a crime not yet committed.

Normally I admit to such matters of taste breezily. So shoot me, I say. I can 
tell you, for example, that I hate Heinz baked beans – too sweet, texture of 
coagulated fish slime – and be confident in my prejudice. But I fear this 
dislike of negronis, indeed of the entire bitters family, is actually a 
character defect. In the past I have accused others of having failed to attain 
full adulthoodfor not liking oysters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/jan/23/oysters-dating-jay-rayner> 
or forordering their steak well done 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/dec/12/steak-meat-animals-cooking>
; well my negroni thing feels equally like a refusal to slough off the itchy 
starter skin of childhood.

Here's the point: as a kid you are meant to acquire a taste for booze through 
hard work and bloody mindedness. I remember well my first teenage slug of beer 
and then staring at the glass, as if it had been an indecent proposal from 
someone you called uncle but wasn't.

That rough bitter hit – nothing compared to Campari, but shocking all the same 
– the burn of the alcohol, the whole complicated, gaseous business of getting 
it down you. But you push on because you know liking this stuff is the oily 
hinge between the infantile and the mature, and that somewhere in the glass 
probably lies a secret which has something to do with sex, as most secrets do.

As a kid my mother introduced me to the possibilities of drinking through a 
small glass of custard-thick advocaat with a depth charge of cherry brandy. She 
called it blood and pus, and thought this hilarious. It had infantile elements: 
the vanilla hit of the advocaat, the sweet shop fruit of the cherry brandy. But 
there was also the burn which was not pleasant. Still, I recognised it as 
something I would have to get to know.

In the 90s, when alcopops first rose to prominence, I wrote articles 
complaining that they made booze far too palatable. Young people of today: too 
lazy to endure stoically the suffering that becoming a drinker demands.

And yet the resurgence of the negroni has made me reconsider my own drinking 
career. It turns out I really am little better than those kids. I swear off the 
aromatics of gin in favour of the cold, formless punch of vodka, better still 
with a glug of lime cordial. Yes, I know: it's my own made-to-measure alcopop.

At 46 I had thought myself all grown up. But in the matter of the glass and 
the negroni that isn't in it, apparently I am not. I'm still a child. Oh, the 
shame.
