
As Jean-Paul Sartre once wrote, hell is other people. Many would agree, 
including the London-based Russian restaurateur Arkady Novikov. Recently he 
used an interview to slag off a whole bunch of hellish people, namely spendy 
Russians. "I find it embarrassing," he said. "Who are these girls drinking 
champagne and carrying crocodile Birkin bags? It's like a disease people get 
when they have money. I don't want to be associated with this thing." Doesn't 
he? That's unfortunate because they are precisely the ones throngingthe 
£100-a-head gastro-disaster that is Novikov in London's Mayfair 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/feb/19/jay-rayner-restaurant-review-novikov>
. If you haven't heard of Novikov be grateful. It's Dante's 46th circle of 
hell, a nose-bleedingly expensive septic tank containing all that is wrong with 
flash restaurants, where the Italian food tastes like cheap Chinese and the 
Imperial sashimi platter costs £227. Before service.

Dear old Arkady is at liberty to slag off Russians in London. I am not. 
Instead I will simply slag off everybody with stupid money, whichever corner of 
the globe they happen to come from, including our own. God knows there's enough 
of them. Right now there's a luxe food economy, focused on a couple of London 
postcodes, which is entirely supported by a grotesque, preening, 
Louboutin-heeled, gold-plated iPhone-carrying, plastic-crashing, 
Bugatti-driving, natural resource-pillaging excuse for humanity that floats 
like some gold-flecked scummy head on the warm beer of the rest of an economy 
simply trying to make do.

There has been an explosion in the numbers of high-end restaurants in recent 
years. None of them would exist were it not for this lot. They sit nightly at 
the tables, flicking selfies at each other on digital currents, air kissing one 
another's bottle-bronzed cheeks, their Botoxed eyebrows feigning constant 
surprise, while picking irritably at platters of exquisitely carved Jamon 
Iberico, or Peking duck with skin like lacquered rosewood, or bits of sashimi 
cut just so. For this is the real tragedy. Many of these restaurants are 
actually rather good: superb ingredients, great cooking, skilled service. And 
all of it is completely wasted on the very people who can afford it; the ones 
who book into them not out of greed or even a tinge of hunger, but because they 
like the way the lighting flatters their complexion and the toiletries in the 
bogs make them smell like one of Dita Von Teese's freshly pampered armpits.

It gets worse. Obviously there are people who don't give a toss about 
restaurants like this. Even if they were in a position to save up, this is not 
how they would wish to spend their money. Fair enough. But there are many 
others who do care, who will strain to save the necessary pile of cash needed 
for their one high-end eating out event of the year. Only to find themselves 
locked in a dining room with a bunch of tossers. What's more as we now know, 
were it not for all the people those expensive restaurants are wasted on, they 
wouldn't even be in business for the people who do appreciate them. Of course, 
some of you may have clocked that I don't just go to them once a year. I have 
to go all the time. And finally you recognise the depth of my tragedy. Being a 
restaurant critic is assumed to be heaven. It's meant to be bliss. Instead, 
because of other people, it all too often becomes something else: a complete 
and utter hell.
