
Name: The Bamfords.

Age: Collectively, Lord and Lady B are 137.

Appearance: Rich.

How rich? The chairman of his family firm JCB is worth more than £3bn. His 
good lady wife brings in some pin money withDaylesford Organics 
<http://daylesford.com/>, purveyors of expensive groceries to the eco-friendly 
elite.

Are they in the news for being so rich? No. Lord Bamford has been making a lot 
of noise abouthow keen he is for Britain to leave the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/17/jcb-boss-says-eu-exit-could-lift-burden-of-bureaucracy-on-uk-businesses>
.

Why so keen? He says it will cut down on the red tape and bureaucracy that is 
strangling British business.

Related: JCB boss says EU exit could lift burden of bureaucracy on UK 
businesses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/17/jcb-boss-says-eu-exit-could-lift-burden-of-bureaucracy-on-uk-businesses>

Is that phrase copyright to all multi-millionaire businessmen or do you have 
to be a Tory donor and peer too, like what he is? How dare you! Many people 
resent us being in thrall to Brussels – a single paltry state among its 38 
instead of a proud empire upon which the sun never sets. Bring on the in-out 
referendum the PM has promised!

Yeaaah … Except we haven’t really been a proud empire upon which the sun never 
sets for quite a few years now, have we? Getting on for a century, you could 
almost say. Still, we should not be fettered! It’s a bally indignity! I mean, 
unnecessary brake on British endeavour.

How so? It’s just endless regulation, regulation, regulation. A chap can’t 
move without having to fill in a form.

What kind of form? Oh, you name it – not doing this, having to do that, 
protecting the other.

Do you mean like “having to protect workers’ rights”? “Not being able to do 
anything you want to or with employees”? Yes, exactly! And if we left the EU, 
we’d be able to negotiate on our own terms and make much better deals for me! 
I mean, the country.

You think the UK – population 65 million consumers – would have more heft than 
the European bloc – population 500 million consumers? According to the same 
principle that says a British soldier is worth more than 15 Frenchies or a 
hundred Eyetalians in battle, YES.

I see. Well, good luck to you and your post-separation solutions to whatever 
barriers and tariffs the EU erects between you. The sun will never set on our 
efforts, sir! Never set!

Do say: “Britons never, never, never will b-EU slaves!”

Don’t say: “Are you sure you’ve been taking your pills, Major?”
