
Veal is a tricky subject, one that's apt to provoke fierce reactions. There's 
something about baby cattle that invokes a fiercely protective instinct in many 
people, and an epicurean sense of pleasure in, well, not so many, in Britain at 
any rate. I count myself among the latter. A whole shin of veal, with a bucket 
of sliced carrots, braised long in white wine and pink grapefruit juice until 
the meat falls from the bone in soft, succulent, sweet flavoured lumps, is a 
divine mouthful. Osso buco, too, I have a weakness for. And I dream of escalope 
de veau Holstein. However, I know these things are not to everyone's tastes.

"When I first started selling our veal in farmers' markets," Jon Brown told me 
over a cup of tea, "some people would come up and harangue me. They wouldn't 
listen to anything I had to say. Some did, though, and are now among my best 
customers." We were in the kitchen of his cottage on one of the winding lanes 
around Looe in Cornwall, where he lives with his wife, Vicky, and two children.

The Browns make unlikely veal farmers. They didn't start out to do anything of 
the sort: Vicky was an ambulance driver, Jon a jewellery wholesaler. In spite 
of, or perhaps because of, the delights of the city, the lure of rural life 
drew them down to Cornwall with the intention of starting a restaurant. Very 
wisely, they decided not to - there are few quicker ways of losing a lot of 
money than that - and opted instead to set up a farm shop. But that proved 
easier said than done.

"And then one day we were talking to Vicky's brother, Rob, who had resurrected 
the dairy herd on this, his parents' old farm. He told us how distressed he was 
having to kill all his bull calves at birth."

Bull calves are one of the unavoidable by-products of the dairy industry. If 
we want milk, butter and cheese (not to mention yogurt, double cream, crème 
fraîche and all those other wonderful dairy products), we need pregnant cows, 
because only cows with calves produce milk. And, inevitably, a certain number 
of those calves will turn out to be proto-bulls, and will remain so until we 
genetically engineer cows not to do so. The meat industry can absorb only so 
much beef, so only a certain number of bull calves are allowed to grow into 
bulls, bullocks or whatever. The rest, more than 250,000 a year, are 
slaughtered at birth. That is an unpalatable fact of British dairy farming life.

It was too unpalatable for Jon and Vicky. Inspired by Hugh 
Fearnley-Whittingstall's River Cottage books, they decided to take on Rob's 
bull calves and turn them into something useful by giving them a longer life, 
even if that meant one of only six months in all. "I'd barely seen a cow at the 
time," Jon said.

They started with five calves, and now, just two years along the line, they're 
taking two a week to the abattoir near Bodmin, with the aim of getting up to 
four a week. They take all the calves Rob can provide, and have started taking 
them in from surrounding farms, too - Holstein/Friesians, with the odd 
Guernsey. They raise them in small groups in loose straw yards or, weather 
permitting, open fields. They supply a dozen restaurants in the area, including 
Nathan Outlaw in Fowey and Fifteen in Watergate Bay, but the farmers' markets 
in Exeter and Truro constitute the major business.

Clearly, small-scale veal farming is not the way to a summer place in 
Mustique. Jon says each calf is worth about £1,000, but once you subtract 
abattoir costs, butchery, feed and transport, that quickly gets whittled away, 
so he is about to do a butchery course, so he can manage that side himself. 
"It's a bit daunting," he said, "but it's interesting, and it means I'll have 
total control over the meat we sell. And we've had to learn everything so far 
as we went along, anyway."

Where to get it

The Real Veal Vompany
1 Bocaddon Cottages, Lanreath, near Looe, Cornwall, 01503 220991, 
bocaddonfarmveal.com <http://www.bocaddonfarmveal.com>

You can buy the Browns' veal at Exeter, Truro an Lostwithiel farmers' markets, 
or by mail order. Vicky's brother, Rob, and his wife Sam, make cheeses from 
their cows' milk, which can be bought at shops in the area or directly from 
Bocaddon farm.
