
Social media has become an essential tool for activists wishing to reach as 
many people as possible, but have other forms of campaigning been overlooked in 
the process?We asked students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/07/students-speak-is-social-media-still-a-campaigners-best-friend>
 whether social media was indeed a campaigner’s best friend, or whether greater 
focus on grassroots activism was required. Below are five of our favourite 
responses.

Related: Students Speak: are there too many development goals? | Carla 
Kweifio-Okai 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/16/students-speak-sustainable-development-goals>

Don’t underestimate face-to-face campaigning

Campaigners increasingly embrace online tools to get their messages across. 
Blogging sites, online personal or group profiles, and cyberspace are used to 
spread awareness about a campaign, interact with and motivate supporters to 
follow the campaign, and coordinate events. Tweets and likes make it easy for 
the campaigners to track their followers’ interaction and engagement, while 
flexibility in social networking gives a behind-the-scenes view of the campaign 
and consequently a sense of accessibility.


But campaigns also involve a degree of mobilisation and a deeper level of 
participation that requires relational ties of some kind (as well as individual 
agency and ability). Thus, campaigning demands an element of fellowship – 
solidarity and companionship that characterise a more personal form of contact.

For me, one of the best strategies is meeting and pressurising decision-makers 
to commit to change; it adds a more relational perspective to the campaign and 
ensures devotion to the cause.

Voula Kyprianou, University of Sheffield, UK

Campaigners can’t afford to ignore social media 

Social media <http://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> has changed the 
way we campaign. It is the ultimate equaliser – giving people the chance to 
have their voices heard on the same stage as the world’s most powerful leaders. 
In the past decade we’ve seen online campaigning help bring down dictators, 
hold big business to account, elect presidents and encourage a whole new 
generation of young people to get involved in issues that matter. Of course, 
this is not to say that social media does not have its downsides, and the same 
tools that can be used for good can also be used to bully and oppress. But for 
campaigners to ignore this new platform would be equivalent to ignoring the 
rise of print media so many years ago. This is simply the way we communicate 
today, and I believe it’s still possible to maintain “grassroots” elements of 
campaigning in this new world. Campaigning on the streets is important, but 
there really is no comparison to the amount of people activists can reach 
online. So yes, social media is still a campaigner’s best friend.

Annabelle Smith, University of Melbourne, Australia 

Social media campaigns still require a spark

The encompassing force of globalisation is facilitating a movement towards an 
online world, characterised by the rapid sharing of social media information, 
which has the power to transcend traditional boundaries. However, is it 
possible to create significant change from an online platform? How can 
politicians be appropriately engaged? These are questions that cloud the 
effectiveness of such far-reaching campaigning. Undoubtedly, social media can 
be used as an effective tool for advocating change, but quality grassroots 
campaigning should be used as a catalyst for mobilising the vast quantity of 
“keyboard warriors”.

Take the poignant UN speech by Emma Watson regarding gender equality, which 
inspired 19m hits forhe4she.org <http://he4she.org/> in the four days 
following. Social media requires a spark to become effective; lazy keyboard 
warriors need a real-life catalyst to inspire their virtual campaign. A further 
prominent example is the public self-immolation of Mohamed Bouazizi in Tunisia, 
which created a wave of revolutionary unrest throughout the Arab world in 2011, 
mobilising 2 million Egyptians in occupying Tahrir Square [and] overthrowing 
Mubarak’s government. It began with Bouazizi and was spread thanks to the 
sharing of a multitude of accessible information, photos, videos and locations 
of imminent protests.

Clearly, social media can be employed as a significant tool for empowerment 
and liberation, yet the online world is a gullible and impatient one; mistakes 
will doubtless be made. Nonetheless, social media represents the future of 
campaigning, so long as the sparks that mobilise the clicktivists continue.


James Laycock, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

A successful campaign relies on online and offline action

As a means of communication, advertisement, and expression, social media has 
become the norm. Many young people, in the developed and developing world 
alike, often have an arguably unhealthy attachment to their mobile device, as 
opportunities to socialise, research, and express oneself to the world through 
written word, recorded video, and carefully cropped pictures are a mere swipe 
of the finger away. Therefore, social media is pivotal to a grassroots campaign 
in regard to organisation, promotion, recruitment, policy and strategy 
briefing, and indoctrination of specific goals and beliefs.

Without the use of a variety of user friendly and informative social media 
applications, a grassroots movement has little chance of making significant 
strides towards achieving its desired change. However, although this is an 
increasingly technological age, where some young people would consider it 
unfathomable to go without their smartphone, social media campaigns must also 
coincide with more old-fashioned techniques of campaigning such as going door 
to door, handing out information pamphlets in public places, campus 
demonstrations, and conducting town hall meetings.

There simply is no substitute for direct human contact if one truly wishes to 
convey a message that is supposed to be convincing, inspiring, and motivating. 
Social media contributes substantially to spreading awareness and coordinating 
logistical movement, but face-to-face interaction is irreplaceable. Also, many 
older people do not use social media and it would be foolish to attempt to form 
a grassroots campaign without utilising every possible method of making the 
campaign stronger.

Patrick Rulong, University of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada

Supporters should add their money, not just clicks to campaigns 

Social media has enabled organisations to crowdfund projects, organise Occupy 
events, support or boycott organisations, offer unbiased coverage of events and 
hold public officers accountable for their actions. It has enabled public 
sharing of views without fear of victimisation or rejection. However, people 
have replaced picketing with likes or retweets, leading to the rise of 
slacktivism. This is also known as armchair activism.

This gives a false sense of fulfilment of moral obligations by encouraging 
people to provide their minimum support. Social media support does not always 
equate to tangible contributions. Campaigners may get a million retweets about 
a particular cause but only a small fraction of people actually give monetary 
contributions or show up. In light of this, Unicef Sweden recently launched the 
campaignLikes don’t save lives <http://youtu.be/QcSZsjlqs4E>, which addresses 
the issue of slacktivism by emphasising the need to give donations in monetary 
value and not in social media currency in order to have a greater impact.


We may argue that we need to embrace technology, but can we imagine if Dr 
[Martin Luther] King lived in our age of social media and decided only to blog 
about his American dream and thereafter shared links on various platforms? 
There is a need to differentiate between the social media enthusiasts and 
campaigners. Activism leads to action. Show your support by donating your 
resources. Go beyond clicking share.

Lillian Nyamongo, University of Glasgow, Scotland
