
What this dog says about me


Who are you?
My name’s Nicola. I’m 22, I’m an administrator at Dior, and I also run a blog 
<http://www.newestnickers.co.uk/>. This is Honey, my Pomeranian.

What does your dog say about you?
I’m not a huge Paris Hilton fan, but I like her dog. Buying Honey was an 
impulse thing. I didn’t look into the practicalities of having a Pomeranian 
before I got her. People say: “That’s not a real dog – it’s a teddy bear.” But 
Honey is more than just an accessory to me.

What’s she like to look after?
She’s very naughty and refuses to walk sometimes, so I have to carry her 
around. She’s quite temperamental and not the sharpest tool in the box – she’s 
always walking into lamp posts or car exhausts – but I love her enough to put 
up with it.

Do you want any other dogs?
In London it’s not possible to have loads of space or a massive garden, so it 
had to be a small dog. But one day I’d definitely like more dogs: different 
breeds, and bigger ones, too.

And what it really says, by Miranda Sawyer

I’m always impressed when anyone aged 18-25 has a pet bigger than a stick 
insect, especially in a city. It shows commitment and an ability to love 
something that isn’t yourself, which is harder than you think when you’re in 
your early 20s and trying to hustle your way into your own life.

It also shows organisation, and this picture shows just how organised Nicola 
is. Her home is very grown-up for someone of her age – maybe her parents gave 
her some furniture or that lamp – and exceptionally clean and co-ordinated.

Honey is beautifully groomed, and so is Nicola. Her eyebrows are works of art, 
as is her hair (those glossy curls); her eye make-up and nails are on point. 
Her earrings and bracelet look expensive. Nicola really is a full-on adult. I 
bet she gives great gifts and fills in her tax return way before it’s due. You 
can tell she works in fashion because she’s wearing one of those weird 
no-sleeved coats which are supposedly cool at the moment. Nobody non-fashion 
wears those, because they’re silly.

Honey is looking gorgeous, too, and her lookalike cushion shows that Nicola 
identifies as a Pomeranian owner, not a dog owner. I imagine she puts up 
pictures of poms on Instagram (I don’t do Insta) and brings Honey along 
whenever she has coffee with her mates. She may well have cute winter coats for 
Honey.

People with pedigree dogs care about appearance and breeding. Nicola looks 
like someone with impeccable manners who will go the extra mile to do things 
properly and who comes from a supportive family. She and Honey might seem to be 
each other’s accessories, but there’s oodles of love in this picture.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <http://magazine@observer.co.uk>
