
When Neil Lucas arrived at Knoll Gardens 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> in 1994, he intended to plant 
trees and shrubs, but discovered that grasses offered the same line, form and 
long-term presence with an extra dimension: movement. Many grasses don't come 
into their own until midsummer and often carry on much longer, animated by 
autumn and winter winds.

Knoll Gardens demonstrates how a high percentage of grasses can be planted 
beneath a canopy of trees and shrubs, with just a few late-flowering perennials 
to add hints of colour and bring rhythm to the planting. As the weather cools, 
the foliage of many grass species - particularly miscanthus, molinia and 
calamagrostis - turns the colour of parchment and coppery brown. On a clear, 
sunny day, the ageing flowers and leaves glow in the winter light and reveal 
striking silhouettes. Some of the smaller grasses remain evergreen right 
through the year and continue to provide structure after others are cut back in 
late winter. A backdrop of trees and shrubs with autumn colour or ornamental 
bark ensures that the scene is constantly changing from one day to the next.

Lucas links grasses in three adjacent groups rather than in lines, and aims 
for marked height differences between each clump, preventing the result looking 
like a haze of grasses (knollgardens.co.uk <http://www.knollgardens.co.uk>).

Verbena bonariensis is a late-flowering perennial that coincides with the peak 
of the grasses and even in winter has elegant seedheads. Other candidates 
include rudbeckia, echinacea and sanguisorba.

Taller grass stems and particularly their flowers stand above their 
neighbours, so they can be more readily backlit by the low sunlight.

Pennisetum alopecuroides 'Hameln' is a tough little grass ideally suited to 
the front of a border where its fluffy flowers, like tiny squirrel tails, dance 
above pale green leaves.

The evergreen Anemanthele lessoniana (formerly Stipa arundinacea) has orangey 
bronze-tinged green leaves. It peaks in its third year and usually dies but 
readily self-seeds.

Miscanthus sinensis is the best grass when a substantial block is called for. 
Of the many varieties, 'Yakushima Dwarf' is a compact and very dense form, 
while 'Malepartus' is taller, with red stems.
