
Q As I spent Christmas eating my body weight in Quality Street, my skin is 
really paying the price. The excessive boozing hasn't helped much either. My 
usual diet is pretty healthy, so I'm not after a detox programme, just 
something to sort out my complexion.
Becky

A One of the best facials I have ever had was at the Bliss Spa. I could see 
the results straightaway, even with my shower-cap hairdo and slightly blotchy 
face (an unavoidable hazard of lying in a cosy room wrapped in a cocoon for 40 
minutes). Bliss has now created the Triple Oxygen Instant Energizing Mask for 
home use. It foams on your face rather than hardening like a typical face pack, 
and leaves you with a bright, fresh complexion. While you're waiting for your 
skin to respond to treatment, I'd recommend using Lancome's Photogenic 
Lumessence foundation, which gives you flawless coverage and is perfect for 
hiding any New Year blemishes.

Q I read with alarm that yellow is the colour for summer 2008. This is not a 
shade that suits me, even if you call it mustard, lemon or bright sunshine. 
What are the other colour options?
Victoria

A Why not try pastel pinks? Everyone from Sonia Rykiel (left) to John Galliano 
showed these delicate shades - so try peach or lilac instead of lemon. It's 
easier to embrace these tones if you push black to the back of your wardrobe 
and replace it with chocolate or caramel. Colour's a big theme this season, so 
give these ice-cream shades a chance.

Q I have just bought a wool jumper dress and it is shedding everywhere. Is 
there anything I can do?
Cassia

A My sympathies. Clumps of wool and a fine coating of fluff on your neck and 
face do little for your poise. If your dress is merino, I'd buy a wool comb from
yarnsmith.co.uk <http://www.yarnsmith.co.uk> If it's loose wool or mohair, 
you'll need a specialist cashmere comb, available frombrora.co.uk 
<http://www.brora.co.uk> Alternatively, you can buy a clothes shaver. Good old 
John Lewis has one for £6.50 (johnlewis.com <http://www.johnlewis.com>). 

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
