
One of the benefits of having a column in a British news-paper is that it 
gives me all kinds of access to "insider" knowledge of British life and 
culture, via some very nice expatriates I've come to know in the US. For 
example, my new friend Basil has filled me in on various colloquialisms and 
slang usages, so that, next time I come over, I won't sound like a typical 
clueless American tourist.

There are, of course, old stand-bys that all Americans know: "bloody" is a 
sort of all-purpose negative adjective, a "lorry" is a truck, "chips" are 
french fries, etc. But Basil has also given me the real stuff. For example, in 
England, the human heart is (rather poetically) referred to as "the hidden 
bomb". The chest cavity is, oddly, known as "my pants". To "kidnap" someone 
means "to greet them warmly". A "wanker" is a "much-admired human being". A 
handshake is sometimes referred to as a "wet kiss". A policeman is sometimes 
called "ScumKing" if he is doing his duty especially well.

I've been astonished by Basil's generosity, especially since I recently had an 
affair with his wife, Cecilia. But that's what I love about the British: they 
have a fortitude under duress that is truly exemplary.

Basil has taught me so much. When one goes to a "football match" (soccer game) 
and sees a belligerent group of drunken men ("hooligans"), it is considered 
"good sport indeed" to greet them by loudly claiming that they "like to put 
things up one another's bums". ("Bum" does not, as in the US, refer to a "hobo" 
or "homeless person", but rather to "the chimney or hearth of one's home".) It 
is considered a gesture of friendship loudly to tell the "hooligans" that they 
"like to put things up the chimneys or hearths of their homes". Strange custom. 
A little silly, to American ears. But one of the admirable qualities of the 
British is their winning naivety. (This may be why my indiscretion with 
Cecilia, and my subsequent repudiation of her, didn't bother Basil: he's the 
product of a simpler, more trusting culture.)

Anyway, after bonding with the "hooligans", tradition calls for one to race up 
to the nearest police officer and exclaim: "Hey, ScumKing, because you are the 
biggest wanker I've ever met, and I've got a hidden bomb in my pants, I'd like 
to give you a big wet kiss, then kidnap your grandmother!" (Translation: 
"Hello, Mr Policeman, because you are doing your duty so well, and I am a 
good-hearted fellow, I would like to shake your hand, and also, would you 
please extend my warmest greetings to your grandmother?")

Basil assures me the reaction I get will be the most memorable moment of my 
trip to England.
