
At software company Paycircle <http://paycircle.co.uk/>, the working hours are 
flexible, the holidays are unlimited and the company chair is a dog called 
Findlay. “The word ‘boss’ simply isn’t welcome,” co-founder Catherine Pinkney 
says. “We recoil at the very idea of hierarchy.”

It may sound like something untenable for a successful business and yet 
flatter workplace structures are gaining in popularity. It’s a trend that is 
particularly prolific in the technology space – Airbnb, Facebook and Spotify 
all have open, collaborative cultures that are flatter by design – but is by no 
means limited to that sector.


US online shoe retailer Zappos is reportedly the largest company to fully 
embrace the model 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/122965/can-billion-dollar-corporation-zappos-be-self-organized>
 so far (it has more than 1,400 members of staff, 280,000 orders a week and 
annual sales of more than $1bn (£0.7bn) after CEO Tony Hsieh readReinventing 
Organizations <http://www.reinventingorganizations.com/> by Frederic Laloux.


Advocates of the model claim that a flatter structure (also known as holacracy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holacracy>, agile or self management) improves 
morale and productivity, encourages risk taking and innovation, and enables the 
business to move more quickly in a competitive market. When decisions have to 
move through several stages of middle management, it is understandably a slower 
process. In SMEs, there may be fewer middle managers, but holding 
decision-making powers close to the entrepreneur’s chest can similarly stifle 
growth.


Related: Sprint finish: how to solve problems and try new ideas in five days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/may/04/sprint-problem-solving-workplace-google-ventures-knapp>

If all goes smoothly, this should mean no office politics, no promotions to 
fight over and no mixed messages from the boss. Pinkney says that there’s a 
real sense of trust and responsibility among the team and that staff turnover 
is low as a result. Decisions are made via “healthy debate”, and if there is no 
consensus, the final say goes to whoever has the most experience in that area 
(which is not always the founders).


“Like every business, of course, we come up against challenges and have to 
work our way through them. It doesn’t slide into chaos because of two things; 
our solid recruitment process and strong leadership,” says Pinkney.

Teams are largely autonomous but a business owner or a board (if the business 
has one) provide leadership when it comes to the company’s vision and 
overarching aims, and then let the workforce get on with achieving them.

There is still some semblance of hierarchy and leadership, but it is related 
to experience rather than power. The key principle is that all employees are 
responsible for deciding how best to apply their skills to help the 
organisation. An employee may not be hired to join a particular team for 
example, but instead navigates towards where they can be most helpful. So they 
might try out a few teams, before settling on one. Risk taking and innovation 
is encouraged.

Team leaders will often change from project to project (dependent on 
experience). The focus is on open communication; theoretically there is no 
information that all employees cannot be privy to, or have a say in.

Some firms embrace this more than others, particularly when it comes to pay – 
GrantTree <http://granttree.co.uk/> and Makers Academy 
<http://www.makersacademy.com/>, for example, let employees set their own 
salaries <http://blog.makersacademy.com/self-setting-salaries/> and those of 
their colleagues, taking experience and market factors into consideration. 
GrantTree, for example, has a committee of employees that sets everyone’s pay 
(including the directors’). The committee is randomly selected and changes 
every six months. Makers Academy encourages openness and transparency around 
pay. Staff who want a pay rise have to make a case to their colleagues, who are 
encouraged to give feedback before a decision is made.

This might sound too good to be true. And, indeed, some companies have found 
flat management unworkable. The online blogging firm Medium abandoned holacracy 
this year, after introducing it in 2012. In ablogpost 
<https://medium.com/the-story/management-and-organization-at-medium-2228cc9d93e9#.oitssslej>
, head of operations, Andy Doyle says: “For us, Holacracy was getting in the 
way of the work.” He adds that the system could be “time-consuming and 
divisive”.


Tim Deeson, director of Canterbury-based technology consultancy Deeson 
<https://www.deeson.co.uk/careers>, says his company moved to a flat management 
model naturally as the business grew. Having one central manager who held all 
the knowledge and managed everyone wasn’t working anymore.


The company has 40 employees grouped in teams of eight to 10. Each has its own 
clients and autonomy over when and where they work. So far they have not had 
any issues with team members not pulling their weight. Deeson says: “If we find 
interesting work and interesting clients, give them the right tools, give them 
smart, talented, pleasant people to collaborate with, generally people want to 
get things done.”


Deeson works on a collaborative model but still has directors who oversee the 
business. The idea of implementing an obligatory paid, five-week sabbatical for 
anyone that had been working at the company for five years, was only drafted as 
policy after discussions with the board. The idea was also circulated to 
employees via a shared Google document for their comments and questions. It 
wasn’t until everyone was happy that it became company policy.


For the employees themselves, working in a non-hierarchical structure does 
pose “a career progression question mark”, Deeson says. “We always say upfront 
in interviews that if pay’s your primary motivator, you’re probably not a good 
cultural fit and we’re not a good fit for you.”


Stewart Johns co-founded Prederi <http://prederi.com/>, a public sector 
consulting firm, based in London, four years ago. The five founding directors 
had all come from big firms with well established corporate ladders and wanted 
to set up a firm that they could run in a different way. Today, the company 
employs 26 people and has no sales targets or internal grades.


Johns admits that they have had to compromise in some instances. To the 
outside world (and potential clients) they have had to create seniority levels 
for staff in order to bid for and win work – clients want to see that there are 
more senior people working on their project. Staff also need to show their 
career level and progression within Prederi when they move on to other 
employers.


“The more junior staff do want some process for promotion (and pay rise). We 
have resisted that. But what we do use [are mentors].” The mentors can be 
anyone fairly experienced within the business, often a board member. “They look 
after the wellbeing of the mentee, and we have appraisals to make sure they 
have the right training to develop a fulfilling career.”


For many small business owners, abandoning management structures entirely will 
be a challenge. Deeson agrees that as an entrepreneur, finding your place in 
this brave new world can be difficult. “When you take yourself out of the ivory 
tower, [you] allow yourself to be criticised as much as everyone else is […] 
that has led to a lot of personal growth from my point of view. You’re not 
there to be listened to because of what your job title is. That’s a difficult 
habit to unlearn.”


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
