
An email pops up on my phone in public view of a respectable acquaintance: 
Channel 4 is reminding me to finish watching an episode ofMade in Chelsea. The 
ensuing blush is complicated – it’s not that I’m embarrassed at being revealed 
as a viewer of reality TV. It’s that I’m embarrassed by watchingreality TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/reality-tv> in 2016, when the genre 
is as knackered as a teen mom.

It is 10 years since The Hills first aired, an American reality show that was 
the first to mush the genre in with soap opera, thus inspiring shows like 
Channel 4’sMade in Chelsea, a programme I once looked forward to but that now I 
watch snatches of when I want to shout at a screen, that stalks me with needy 
emails and memories of the fun we once had.

What was at first a frothy, funny peephole into the heightened lives of 
overprivileged bell-ends is now, five years later, at best offensive (the 
narrative arc “boy cheats on girl, other girls turn on her” has been worn so 
thin it’s now more of a narrative slope), at worst deafeningly boring, all 
guilt no pleasure. Ten years. And it’s showing its age – after so long 
saturating the listings, reality TV has exhausted its tricks.

Last week Big Brother received the lowest viewing figures for a launch show 
ever, down 300,000 viewers from 2015, and 600,000 fewer than 2014. Netflix 
means we no longer watch telly when we’re told. And if we do find ourselves 
watching a reality show, not only have the twists and tricks become so 
predictable we can do a countdown to the big reveal, but the stars have been 
exposed and groomed to the extent that they’re indistinguishable from the film 
stars they were designed to funhouse-mirror. The genre has been voted out.

Reality TV: an amorphous term that’s always held itself in ironic quote marks. 
There is nothing real about these stories of destruction, transformation, sex 
in small spaces, beer.

There is nothing real about these stories of destruction, transformation, sex 
in small spaces, beer

As if to push in the final nail, the second series of UnReal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/14/could-dark-dating-show-satire-unreal-kill-reality-tv>
 has just landed on Amazon Prime, a drama set behind the scenes of aBachelor
-style show calledEverlasting. Our heroine is a monster called Rachel Goldberg, 
a feminist producer whose responsibility is to manipulate bikini-clad 
contestants into performing the role required, whether “blacktivist” or 
“desperate MILF”. All this in a quest for the biggest humiliation of all: 
romance. WatchingUnReal as a reality TV connoisseur is a bit like eating foie 
gras while viewing CCTV footage of geese being force-fed, a sweet dark sickness 
that returns when you next find yourself buried under a pile of Hobnob crumbs 
watching ITV2’sLove Island.

The last time I saw Big Brother the most distracting element was how odd it 
was to watch a room of people learn to live without their phones. And for the 
franchise to continue, for the genre to continue, the networks would surely 
prefer their audiences to do the same. Because for some people who have grown 
up in the shadow of reality TV, the obvious extension is to use their phones to 
create their own.

In Dave Eggers’ novel The Circle, politicians wear SeeChange cameras for 
“transparency”; everybody can see what they see, all the time. Periscope (the 
app bought by Twitter last year for $100m) has a similar aim, with users 
broadcasting their whole lives from their phones.

As well as candlelight vigils for victims of the Pulse nightclub atrocity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/13/orlando-nightclub-shooting-world-in-mourning-for-victims>
, and continuous streams from a girl’s car as she chats to her 500,000 fans 
during traffic jams, there have been the inevitable horrors – a 19-year-old 
girl broadcast her suicide in a suburb of Paris; a pair of boys filmed 
themselves attacking somebody, and an 18-year-old streamed her friend being 
raped. The benefit of TV, it appears, is that all pain was controlled. That 
somebody was watching.

Reality TV <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/reality-tv> taught us 
that the minutiae of a person’s life could be valuable. But rather than cash 
prizes, notoriety is the payoff. Millions of people watch YouTube stars who 
share their entire relationships, from first date to marriage proposal – they 
didn’t need to audition, they just needed a webcam. Ten years since the genre 
changed TV, it’s dying because it got too big – it seeped through the cracks in 
the screen and became our new reality.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman <mailto:@EvaWiseman>
