
A century ago, European nations vented their aggression by making war, not 
playing football. The Battle of the Somme began on 1 July 1916 and lasted until 
mid-November; by the time it ended, more than a million soldiers were dead, 
probably including the Welsh Guards in this photograph, whose hapless task was 
to recapture the village ofGuillemont 
<http://www.ww1battlefields.co.uk/somme/guillemont.html> from the 
industrialised German army with its howitzers, flamethrowers and 
big-bellied zeppelins.

In a terrain that was recently farmland, the most depressing detail is the 
featureless, scrubby horizon

These dispirited infantrymen hardly even have the luxury of a trench; they 
huddle in what looks like a gash left behind by a shell, and may have been told 
– as were many of their colleagues – to use clods of earth as camouflage, 
burying themselves alive. One of them, as blessedly indifferent to the chaos 
and carnage asThe Good Soldier Švejk in Jaroslav Hašek’s novel, has left his 
rifle pointed at the sky and fallen asleep – unless, that is, he is actually 
dead. Another, his taut face hollowed by the memory of horrors, has the 
unfocused stare that was a symptom of shellshock. A third man, his jaw clamped 
shut on his misery, gazes at the photographer with numb stoicism.

But now the document turns crazily surreal, like the pointless war itself. The 
long-faced man has his hands crossed on three knees, and he seems, like a 
pantomime horse, to be the owner of the fourth leg cocked beside him. Is 
another soldier, also asleep or dead, stowed in the crypt-like foxhole behind 
him? Or do the extra limbs belong to a casualty whose upper half has been blown 
away? Is that grey, hovering cloud, behind which more figures are hidden, a 
souvenir of relaxing fag smoke, or of some other incineration? And do those 
abandoned knapsacks belong to corpses hauled out of sight of the camera?

In a terrain that was recently farmland and is now a butchered waste, the most 
depressing detail is the featureless, scrubby horizon. Painters like Turner and 
Constable lowered the skyline in their landscapes: earth mattered less than the 
spectacle of the air, where clouds represented the thoughts of God. Here the 
sky has been expunged, or reduced to a coffin lid that abruptly shuts on these 
subterranean men. In 1908, glorifying the sportive energy of combat, the 
Italian futurist Marinetti called war “the hygiene of the world”. This raw, 
messy photograph gives the lie to that loathsome notion: it exposes war as the 
defilement of the world, not its purification.
