
At last some light at the end of the “defeat Brexit” tunnel, in the form of Ed 
Balls’ call in Tuesday’s Daily Mirror for the UK to vote remain, but then to
“press Europe to restore proper borders, and put new controls on economic 
migration” 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/unlike-euro-2016-eu-referendum-8182469>. 
Were that message to be amplified by other key Labour remain supporters then 
Polly Toynbee’s truly spine-chilling description of the likely outcome of a 
leave vote (Brexiters have unleashed furies even they can’t control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/13/brexit-supporters-leave-vote-right>
, 14 June) could be overcome. As she notes, a remain call to tighten future 
border controls is likely to be well received by leaders of other EU countries, 
given the desires of their populations and the threat these governments are 
under from the rise of extreme-right parties.

Such an approach could also allow Labour to redeem itself in the eyes of its 
traditional voters and so persuade waverers to vote to stay in. For this to 
succeed, they must assure such supporters that central to Labour’s “remain and 
reform” campaign will be working with others across Europe to enable nation 
states to strengthen border controls. To do so, even at this 11th hour, could 
help prevent us being condemned to four more years of ruthless shredding of 
what is left of our welfare state, by Boris Johnson and Michael Gove as prime 
minister and chancellor. If, however, Brexit triumphs, those politicians who 
remained myopically in favour of uncontrolled EU migration will have a lot to 
answer for.
Colin Hines
East Twickenham, Middlesex

• Like most Labour MPs and the Labour movement generally, I am certainly in 
favour of the UK remaining in the EU, for strong economic reasons. Polly 
Toynbee’s piece mentions the strong concern felt by so many working-class 
people over the numbers coming into the country.

It is surely time for the leaders of the EU to reconsider the dogmatic and 
inflexible policy of the free movement of labour. As for the UK, controls on 
Commonwealth immigration have existed for half a century, and on other non-EU 
states, much longer.

Controls on immigration – apart from providing refuge to those fleeing terror 
and persecution – and combating racism and discrimination here are not 
contradictory. It was the settled and non-controversial policy until the 
introduction of the free movement of labour.
David Winnick MP
Labour, Walsall North

• Like most people in the political class, Matthew d’Ancona fails to 
understand the causes and implications of the impending large vote for Brexit (
We are just 10 days from making a terrible mistake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/13/10-days-from-terrible-mistake-europe-immigration-leave-campaign>
, 13 June). The government has lost control of immigration, while many people 
have legitimate concerns about the increasing level of immigration. In the EU 
negotiations, David Cameron indicated that he would gain reforms from the EU to 
enable such control to be restored, but he has not campaigned upon this 
critical issue.

There is a widespread crisis of belief in the political class. This crisis 
sees policies being made which are detrimental to the majority of people. 
Immigration is a crystallisation of this. It fits in with real concerns about 
access to jobs, services and housing, as well the reality of stagnant and 
declining wages.

Instead of describing a vote for Brexit as the “idiot option”, Matthew should 
use his intelligence to consider how policies might be brought forward which 
might reduce immigration, ease the housing crisis and improve access to 
better-paid jobs. Whatever the result of the referendum, real political 
leadership will be necessary to generate and adopt such policies.

Immigration itself needs to be tackled by the development of a skills strategy 
that enables more local recruitment. Such a strategy involves unprecedented 
government investment and planning in skills which goes far beyond the 
platitudes of apprenticeship targets and looks at the real issues facing 
recruitment across every employment sector.

The best response to a vote to remain is a declaration of intent by 
politicians to reduce immigration and work with EU partners to do this. If this 
proves impossible then it will be necessary to hold another referendum. The 
concerns of large numbers of people cannot be ignored. The government’s failure 
in this regard has got us into the mess we are in now.
Paul Lally
Liverpool

• Aditya Chakrabortty (Abandoned, angry and tired of broken promises 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/nye-bevan-labour-heartland-backing-brexit-south-wales>
, 8 June) paints a chilling picture of the swing to Ukip in south Wales, with 
immigration being given as the main reason to vote leave, despite the actual 
invisibility of the immigrants. He suggests this is caused by “the collapse of 
the economy and the distrust of politicians … a community that has been left 
behind”.

But these underlying factors do not of themselves determine this fallacious, 
imagined solution of blaming the immigrants. This ideology, with stereotypes 
and myths such as “eastern Europeans turning up at the job centre are handed a 
grand”, comes from somewhere.

We must add in the systematic torrent of anti-immigrant abuse and lies that 
has for years poured out from the popular press. Add to this the overtly racist 
politics of Ukip. Mix in the latest well-publicised and irresponsible populism 
of Johnson and Gove. Stir with the vacillating and mainly negative approach 
over decades by most mainstream politicians to immigration and asylum. The 
outcome: xenophobia, prejudice and scapegoating.

Late in the day, some welcome voices are attacking Brexit’s underlying racism, 
and are making the case for immigration and free movement with the necessary 
mix of factual evidence and emotional appeal to solidarity. I hope this is not 
a question of too little, too late.
Gideon Ben-Tovim
Senior fellow in sociology, University of Liverpool

• Gordon Brown brings some good sense to the immigration debate (Brown leads 
the charge as Labour party urges all its voters to back remain 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/12/lead-the-eu-dont-leave-gordon-brown-launches-labour-push-for-remain>
, 13 June), but does not go far enough. It is an undisputed fact that we are 
living longer, and the average age of the UK population is increasing. There 
will soon be too few working taxpayers to fund pensions, care for the elderly 
and meet their increasing demands on the NHS. One way to deal with this without 
slashing pensions or privatising the NHS still further is by progressively 
absorbing young, tax-paying immigrants. The numbers needed are already 
arriving. Massive public investment in housing and the infrastructure needed to 
support a growing population will create jobs, boost the economy and benefit us 
all. Immigrants are a long-term solution to our problems, not the cause. I can 
see why Brexiters of all parties like to use immigrants as scapegoats for their 
failed policies, but I cannot see why the current Labour leadership is so 
tentative on this issue.
Bryan Turner
Birmingham

• Why aren’t the remain campaigners exposing as the fraud it is the main 
effective argument used in favour of Brexit? This is the false claim that 
leaving the EU will give us more control over our borders. It won’t! Even 
Brexiters admit we will have to join the European Economic Area to survive 
economically – and that necessarily involves accepting EU rules on migration. 
The only change in that area will be that instead of having a major say in rule 
changes, as one of the biggest EU countries, we will have no say at all and 
have to accept rules decided by others.
Jim Fisher (Green party member)
Luton, Bedfordshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
