
My aunt Lois Smith, who has died aged 96, put her extraordinary energies into 
people and causes.

An enthusiast, a starter, a provocateur, she set the scene in 1948 when she 
sought out a young Oxford film buff calledLindsay Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/sep/03/2>, who was set to train as a 
teacher, and persuaded him to make a film about her husband Desmond’s Yorkshire 
colliery equipment company. It was his first stab at directing, and they called 
it Meet the Pioneers. So began a friendship that continued until Anderson’s 
death in 1994 at Lois’s house in the Dordogne, where he was holidaying. It was 
Lois who looked after the funeral arrangements.

Also in 1948, Lois had met the Hungarian-born artist Jean-Georges Simon when 
she saw a painting of his on a Wakefield gallery wall and demanded Desmond buy 
it. Death stalks this story, too, since when Desmond died tragically young in 
1950, Lois installed Simon in the garden of her cottage in the Yorkshire Dales 
to carve the headstone for Desmond’s grave in Burnsall churchyard.

Although she later trained as a social worker, Lois’s calling was as a sort of 
super groupie, intuitively understanding artistic talents and needs. She was a 
prime mover in setting up theLindsay Anderson Memorial Foundation 
<https://www.lindsayanderson.com/> and the film-maker’s Stirling University 
archive, as well as the Jean-Georges Simon Trust: his paintings, drawings and 
archive had been left to her by the artist’s widow.

Lois was the youngest child of Daisy (nee Raby) and Frank Martin, her father 
being a busy GP in Heaton, Bradford. She attended Cheltenham Ladies college, 
and at 20 married Desmond Sutcliffe; their children, Perry and Robin, were born 
in short order. Following Desmond’s death, she met and marriedMickey Smith 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2009/apr/24/obituary-mickey-smith>; 
their son, Stephen, was born in 1962. Mickey’s surveying job took the couple to 
London and Cornwall, but they returned to Yorkshire in 1976, divorcing in the 
mid-80s yet still interdependent. Lois set about shaking up Calderdale’s civic 
dignitaries, pinning down those she saw as offenders with her mixture of 
bluster, charm and ruthlessness.

Indeed, she would argue the toss with anyone, stating opinions as if they were 
facts. Because she could also be open and warm, however, she made more friends 
than enemies. My strongest memory among many is of Lois hand-rolling a 
cigarette at her 90th birthday party and proudly displaying the packet legend 
“Smoking Kills”.

She died, quite unrepentantly, of lung cancer. Lois is survived by Perry, 
Robin and Stephen, six grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.
