
A woman who wants to use the frozen eggs of her dead daughter to give birth to 
a grandchild 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/may/08/high-court-battle-mother-daughter-frozen-eggs>
 is appealing to be allowed to continue her legal battle.

The woman, 59, and her husband, 58, lost an action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/15/mother-loses-bid-to-use-dead-daughters-frozen-eggs-to-give-birth-to-grandchild>
 at the high court last year when a judge ruled there was insufficient evidence 
that the plan had been the wish of the woman’s daughter, who died from cancer 
aged 28.

On Thursday they sought permission from two court of appeal judges in London 
to challenge Mr Justice Ouseley’s decision last June.

After hearing submissions from the couple, who were referred to as Mr and Mrs 
M, the judges said they would take time to consider the arguments and give 
their decision at a later date. Lord Justice Treacy, sitting with Lord Justice 
Floyd, acknowledged that it was a “very sad case”.

The mother said afterwards that she was hopeful the court would give 
permission to appeal. She and her husband began the legal process five years 
ago.

If she eventually wins the case, it is thought Mrs M could become the first 
woman in the world to become pregnant using a dead daughter’s eggs.

The case originally came to court after the Human Fertilisation and Embryology 
Authority <http://www.hfea.gov.uk/> refused to issue a special direction 
allowing the eggs to be released from storage at Hammersmith hospital for 
export to a US fertility clinic.

In dismissing the case, Ouseley cited the fact that there was no document 
explicitly detailing the daughter’s alleged wish to have a child with her 
mother acting as a surrogate.

He also said there was no evidence that the daughter had also considered vital 
matters such as “the implications on her mother’s health, or the implications 
of her mother acting as a surrogate, namely that her mother would be the legal 
mother of her daughter’s child”.

The high court heard that the daughter, who was not in a relationship and who 
feared that further cancer treatment might leave her unable to have children, 
initially had her eggs frozen in 2008 and discussed surrogacy with her mother 
because she hoped she would live to raise the child herself.

As her illness became more severe, the daughter signed a form saying she did 
not want her eggs to perish in the event of her death and said they should be 
stored for 10 years. However, she did not complete a separate form requesting 
instructions on what should happen to the eggs.

Her mother claimed her daughter had told her she wanted her to carry any 
babies, and said she intended to have the eggs fertilised by an anonymous sperm 
donor, which a New York clinic had agreed to arrange.

Ouseley said he had been persuaded there had been no breach of the parents’ 
human rights and refused permission to appeal, saying he was not convinced it 
would have much prospect of success. However, the parents have exercised the 
right to challenge the decision directly in the court of appeal.
