
1. Best of British

"This is how food was before the advent of the supermarket and mass 
production," runs the sales pitch at this tiny deli-cafe. It certainly ticks 
all the boxes. Ingredients are British, "100% organic" and there's a real, 
transparent emphasis on local suppliers. Breads come from Hobbs House in 
Chipping Sodbury; its Godminster Vintage cheddar from nearby Bruton etc., as 
you can read on the chalkboards. Crucially, the end products, its gourmet 
sandwiches and immaculate quiches, taste fantastic. BoB's proclaimed "best 
brownie in Bath" is very good. It's biscuity without, fudgy within and full of 
bitter, fruity nuggets of a, presumably, high-quality, high-cocoa solids 
chocolate.

• Sandwiches from £2.50; slice of quiche £3.25. 12 Broad Street, +44 (0)1225 
448055;bestofbritishdeli.co.uk <http://www.bestofbritishdeli.co.uk>

2. The Porter
 Demuth's 
Bath's vegetarian scene revolves around two distinct poles, the Porter and 
Demuth's (2 North Parade Passage, off Abbey Green, +44 (0)1225 446059;
demuths.co.uk <http://www.demuths.co.uk>). Rachel Demuth's restaurant offers 
the more sophisticated experience, but with even lunchtime mains - say, an 
elaborately-pimped plate of lemon and herb aracini - coming in at just under 
£10, it hovers on the outer reaches of this feature's remit. It's only really 
Demuth's breakfasts and snacks - perhaps a warm cheese scone or piece of lemon 
polenta cake (with tea/coffee, £3.95) - that could be described as 
"affordable". The Porter is a much earthier experience. About as close as Bath 
gets to grungy, this iconic vegetarian pub and live music venue has been 
feeding a boho crowd for years. You can munch on stuff like hummus and garden 
salad rolls; a mixed bean and lentil chilli; or artichoke and sweet pepper 
pizza. The only danger is lingering too long. All dark woods, drowsy blues rock 
and laidback good vibes, it's the kind of place where you can easily pop-in for 
a snack and end-up in a long, boozy session.

• Sandwiches £4.25; mains from £6.25. 15 George Street, +44 (0)1225 424104; 
theporter.co.uk <http://www.theporter.co.uk>

3. Jika Jika
 Jika Jika cafe, Bath 
"Coffee should be as black as hell, as strong as death and as sweet as love," 
runs the famous Turkish proverb, painted on one wall. My flat white certainly 
has a complexity of flavour that puts the high street chains to shame. Popular 
with yummy mummies and young professionals, this long, quirkily decorated 
"coffee house and canteen" is, perhaps, a touch smarter than that title 
suggests, but the food - which, from lunch onwards, centres on ciabattas, 
salads and a selection of interesting stone-baked flat bread 'pizzas' - is good 
value. A breakfast dish of eggs Florentine (£6.50) is well rendered, the 
perfectly poached eggs perched on sweetish muffins and slathered in a 
creditable lemony Hollandaise.

• Breakfast from £4, flatbreads/ciabatta from £3.50. 4a Princes Buildings, 
George Street, +44 (0)1225 429903;jikajika.co.uk <http://www.jikajika.co.uk>

4. The Whole Bagel
 The Whole Bagel, Bath 
Fresh and traditionally baked still-warm bagels filled with good things. 
What's not to like? Well, OK, a New York connoisseur might perhaps pooh-pooh 
the salt beef on the Guardian's sample bagel, but said meat, like the other 
components (tomato, red onion, horseradish mayo, on a lightly onion-flavoured 
bagel), has decent flavour, and it all combines well. For £3.25, it is money 
well spent. The "pizza" bagels, incidentally, halved and thickly topped with 
cheese and pepperoni (£1.85), look like the kind of guilty, filthy food that a 
man could get addicted to.

• Bagels from £2.50. 4 Upper Borough Walls, +44 (0)1225 333259; 
thewholebagel.co.uk <http://www.thewholebagel.co.uk>

5. The Fine Cheese Co 
 The Fine Cheese Co, Bath 
It was always unlikely that one of the country's finest artisan cheesemongers 
would have a crap cafe, and, so, happily, it proved. On principle, the Guardian 
is knocking off a point for the pre-packed sandwiches (they actually look 
pretty good), but, otherwise, the Fine Cheese Co cafe, next door to the shop 
itself, is a bit of a doozy. Chef Hugh Dennis-Jones's team turn out incredible 
savoury tarts and cakes, and superior versions of simple dishes such as potted 
freshwater crayfish or local asparagus, poached quail's egg and Peroche goat's 
cheese. A bowl of celery, new potato and spring onion soup, served with an 
excellent rye sourdough bread, is a serious potage, the flavours clear and 
true. Somewhat surprisingly, given the company's influential role as a cheese 
wholesaler, retailer and maturer, the dairy doesn't dominate. Although, you can 
graze on a plate (£6.95) of fruits, crackers and three freshly-cut cheeses 
chosen by owner Ann-Marie Dyas. The place itself is a higgledy-piggledy 
sequence of rooms - think posh country kitchen - with some suntrap seating on 
the street outside.

• Sandwiches £3.75; mains from £6.95. 29 & 31 Walcot Street, +44 (0)1225 
487993;finecheese.co.uk <http://www.finecheese.co.uk>

6. The Sausage Shop

This Delia-endorsed butcher specialises, as you might have guessed, in 
bangers. Said ultra-traditional links (natural gut casings, additive-free, oats 
not rusk) come in over 30 varieties and, each day, a couple are available to 
takeaway hot with mash and gravy, or on a baguette. In sausage terms, the 
"Somerset scrumpy" is pretty radical. It has a very coarse ground texture, and, 
while it's moist enough, there is none of the big burst of hot, lubricating 
fattiness which, as a nation, we have come to expect from even most upmarket 
sausages. You can tell why some people find the Sausage Shop's creations - 
weird concept this, I know - too meaty. Personally, for me, the flavours of 
pork and apple sing, where most sausages mumble. A fine, filling meal.

• Sausage 'n' mash, £3.80. 7 Green Street, +44 (0)1225 318300; 
sausage-shop.co.uk <http://www.sausage-shop.co.uk>

7. The Real Italian Ice Cream Co 

Next door, you'll find its sibling, the Real Italian Pizza Co, which, with its 
wood-fired oven and thin crusts, is bringing proper pizza to Bath (£6.95 - 
£9.95). This creperia and gelateria, meanwhile, concentrates on the sweet 
stuff. The honeycomb pieces were rather humdrum, but, otherwise, an intensely 
fresh and creamy vanilla cone is testament to the Italians' fastidiousness over 
food. All the ice-cream is made fresh each day, as it would be in Rome. 
Curiously, a scoop is also at least 95% fat free.

• Cones from £1.80; crepes from £3.95. 17 York Street, +44 01225 330121

8. Same, Same But Different

Ostensibly, this is your typical contemporary cafe-diner. It's all big picture 
windows; bright, curious art; and casual dining from a modish menu that mixes 
tapas with mains like grilled mackerel with a warm horseradish, avocado and 
Jersey Royal salad. However, SSBD's food is quality stuff, shot through with a 
certain creative flair, which differentiates it from the competition. For 
instance, a sweet, meaty dish of good chorizo cooked in cider is cleverly 
offset by the iron, charred, nutty notes that a few green beans and toasted 
almonds add to the dish. It is same, same, but ever so slightly different.

• Tapas £4-£5; mains from £7.25. 7a Princes Buildings, entrance Bartlett 
Street, +44 (0)1225 466856

9. The Raven of Bath
 The Raven of Bath 
Like pies? Then you will love the Raven. This Camra-friendly boozer (no fruit 
machines, no music, good beers, convivial chatter) serves eight varieties of 
pie produced by the award-winning Bristol company, Pieminister. These include 
one made exclusively for the Raven, a superb beef and ale number that's full of 
rich, slow-cooked flavours. The kitchen, however, could and should finesse the 
extras. Both mash and gravy are passable, but the gravy could be punchier and 
mustard mash is a touch lumpy and underseasoned. In fact, if you're looking for 
something a bit more gastro, perhaps try the nearby Garrick's Head (7 & 8 St 
Johns Place, +44 (0)1225 318368;garricksheadpub.com 
<http://www.garricksheadpub.com>). What its rather bling interior - pink walls 
with huge silver cloches pinned to them! - lacks in taste, the food more than 
makes up for. One of three local pubs owned by chef Charlie Digney, the Garrick 
gets expensive at night, but, at lunch, it does a selection of sandwiches and 
cheaper core dishes (burger, Caesar salad, fish 'n' chips, all £9.95).• Pie, 
mash, gravy, £8.20; other food from £4.10. 6-7 Queen Street, Bath, +44 (0)1225 
425045;theravenofbath.co.uk <http://www.theravenofbath.co.uk>

10. Yak Yeti Yak 

Those looking to go beyond the curry norm, should head to this charming 
basement restaurant. Its light, vibrant, sensitively-spiced Nepalese dishes 
have won it, not just a loyal local following (it had to move to bigger 
premises in 2007), but praise from several national guides. With rice or daal, 
you're looking at around £7-£11 for a main course. The lunch/early evening 
three-course set-menu - a potato and sesame seed aloo dum salad perhaps, 
followed by that day's meat or vegetarian curry, with orange musurko dal and 
basmati rice - is a steal.

• Set menu, vegetarian £10.50, meat £12. 12 Pierrepont Street, +44 (0)1225 
442299;yakyetiyak.co.uk <http://www.yakyetiyak.co.uk>

Food blog: what do you make of this top 10? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/jul/02/best-cheap-food-eating-bath>

• Bath Food Festival <http://www.garden-events.com/bath/> runs from 3-4 July. 
Cross Country trains <http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk/> travel from 
Manchester to Bath, via Bristol.
