
Seared scallops with Chinese sausage and peas

Chinese sausage, which is widely available from Asian grocers and online 
<http://www.wingyipstore.co.uk/display-product.php?ref=81720&searchStr=sausage&returnaction=searching&urlret=searchmain.php>
, is sweet, rich and enticingly smoky. I add it to steamed rice with strips of 
omelette and a few baby veg stir-fried with soy. Here, it adds zest to mellow, 
creamy scallops. Serve with plain rice. Serves four.

70g dried Chinese pork sausage (lap cheong), sliced thinly on an angle
20g unsalted butter
1 tbsp sunflower oil
16 scallops
20g ginger, peeled, thinly sliced and cut into julienne
2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed
50g spring onion, sliced thinly on an angle
100g peas (defrosted, if using frozen)
2 tbsp brandy
1½ tsp rice vinegar
Salt and black pepper
25g pea shoots
15g coriander leaves, chopped

Put a large, heavy frying pan on high heat, then sear the sausage in its own 
fat for two to four minutes, until slightly crisp and golden. Remove from the 
pan and set aside. Add the butter and oil to the pan and add the scallops, flat 
side down. Leave to sear on one side undisturbed for two minutes, occasionally 
basting them in the hot oil, then gently toss a few times. With a slotted 
spoon, transfer them somewhere warm.

To the hot cooking juices in the pan, add the ginger, garlic, spring onion and 
peas, cook for a minute on medium to high heat, pour in the brandy and leave to 
sizzle and reduce by half. Stir in the vinegar, scallops, sausage and half a 
teaspoon of salt, cook for another minute, remove from the heat and fold 
through the pea shoots and coriander. Serve sprinkled with freshly ground black 
pepper.

Chilled avocado soup with tomato croutons

A soup that will surprise you with its clean flavours and bright freshness. 
Serve within an hour or two, as it tends to discolour. The croutons are worth 
doing, because they add sweet and smoky notes, but use shop-bought, if need be. 
Serves four

4 medium-sized ripe avocados
2½ tbsp lemon juice
2 medium cucumbers, peeled and roughly chopped
1 big garlic clove, peeled and crushed
1½ tsp ground cumin
350ml vegetable (or chicken) stock
150g soured cream
2 spring onions, finely sliced
Salt and white pepper

For the croutons
1 medium tomato
2 tsp tomato paste
3 tbsp olive oil, plus extra to garnish
½ tsp sweet paprika, plus extra to garnish
½ tsp hot smoky paprika
100g crustless bread, broken into 1.5cm chunks (1 small loaf)

Heat the oven to 130C/260F/gas mark ½. Start with the croutons. Over a small 
bowl, coarsely grate the tomato so you're left with most of the skin in your 
hand and the juice and flesh in the bowl. Discard the skin. Mix in the tomato 
paste, oil, both paprikas and half a teaspoon of salt. Mix in the bread until 
the liquid has been soaked up. Spread the croutons on an oven tray and bake for 
50 minutes, until dry and crunchy. Remove and leave to cool.

Peel and deseed three avocados. Roughly chop the flesh and toss in lemon juice 
to stop discolouration. Put the chopped avocado, lemon juice, cucumber, garlic 
and cumin in a food processor, pulse a few times, then add the stock, soured 
cream, a teaspoon of salt and a quarter-teaspoon of pepper, and process until 
smooth; add a little water if you find it too thick. Taste, season as 
necessary, then transfer to a bowl and chill for an hour or two.

To serve, spoon the cold soup into individual bowls, peel and cut the flesh of 
the last avocado into 1cm dice and sprinkle on top. Scatter over the spring 
onion and croutons, followed by a pinch of sweet paprika and a drizzle of olive 
oil.

• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi <http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk> 
andNopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com/> in London.
