
Alan Duncan <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alanduncan>, the Conservative 
frontbencher who complained that MPs are being "forced to live on rations", was 
last night sacked from the shadow cabinet as punishment for his outburst.

David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> demoted 
Duncan from his position as shadow leader of the Commons, with a seat in the 
shadow cabinet, to the more junior post of shadow justice minister.

The action was a direct punishment for Duncan's remarks last month that MPs 
were being "treated like shit" because the world "has gone mad" after the 
expenses scandal.

Duncan, who was called to Cameron's Westminster office yesterday, was said to 
have readily accepted his demotion which will see him take charge of 
Conservative prisons policy under the shadow justice secretary, Dominic Grieve.

In a statement last night Duncan accepted that his remarks had made his 
position in the shadow cabinet untenable. As shadow leader of the Commons, 
Duncan spoke on expenses reform:

"This is a sensible decision. You have to be realistic about how difficult the 
expenses issue has been. What matters most is winning the election and David 
Cameron becoming the prime minister. I am very happy to get stuck into another 
job."

Cameron made clear that Duncan will struggle to make it back to the shadow 
cabinet when he issued a brief statement. "I'm grateful for Alan's work as 
shadow leader of the house and I'm sure he will continue to make a valuable 
contribution as shadow justice minister."

Duncan will be replaced in what Tory sources said would be a minimal shadow 
cabinet reshuffle. Duncan's appointment to the shadow justice team led to a few 
changes last night.

Grieve relinquishes his post as shadow attorney general to concentrate on his 
main job as shadow justice secretary. Grieve will be happy with this change, 
not least because the respected barrister and Tory MP, Edward Garnier, who sits 
as a recorder, will take his dream job of shadow attorney general.

Cameron told Duncan that his position in the shadow cabinet was untenable 
after his incautious remarks last month to the blogger and film maker, Heydon 
Prowse. Duncan had invited Prowse to meet him at the Commons in June after the 
blogger planted a flower bed in the shape of a pound in his garden in protest 
at the MP's £4,000 claims for gardening. Prowse recorded their meeting at 
Westminster.

Duncan quickly apologised when his comments started circulating.

Cameron has faced criticism in the past for acting slowly. In January 2008 he 
initially decided not to sack Derek Conway as a Conservative MP after a Commons 
committee rebuked him for paying his "all but invisible" son £45,163 to work as 
his research assistant.
