
I treat some of the sickest patients admitted to hospital and making decisions 
about resuscitation is a routine part of my job. In addition to being a doctor, 
I am also younger brother to Neil, who has severe learning disabilities.

Communication is key in all aspects of healthcare, but particularly in 
end-of-life decisions. As doctors we are encouraged and obliged to discuss 
resuscitation with patients and, if appropriate, their families. In the vast 
majority of cases, a simple, honest conversation ensures that all parties are 
in agreement. As a more junior doctor, I shied away from bringing up what I 
considered a morbid subject. Why upset the jovial 85 year-old I’ve just 
admitted with talk of death? But now I realise that explaining the best and 
worse case scenarios is the right approach.

Cardiac arrest is an incredibly vast and complex topic. Cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation (CPR) is equally complicated. Yet unfortunately many people have 
an inaccurate perception of what resuscitation can achieve. Perhaps this is 
perpetuated by television and film, but the responsibility to educate lies with 
the medical profession.

We teach CPR to the public, which has been shown to lead to a huge improvement 
in recovery from out-of-hospital cardiac arrests. These are patients that are 
well, but suddenly collapse due to their heart going into a dangerous rhythm. 
Most of these cases are due to heart problems such as a heart attack. In these 
patients CPR is vital and helpful in many cases. Nevertheless, many patients 
will not survive even with effective CPR.

Hospitalised patients are a very different population. If the primary problem 
is something like a severe infection that has overwhelmed the patient’s body, 
their heart might stop even if there is no intrinsic cardiac problem. Therefore 
CPR has an incredibly low success rate. CPR is an aggressive, invasive 
procedure which one should not be subjected to unless there is a reasonable 
chance of success. Even if we successfully restart the heart, patients often 
remain on a breathing machine for days to weeks as we wait to see if brain 
damage has occurred. It frequently has.

Patients with learning disabilities present an additional layer of complexity. 
If they are able to make decisions about their care, of course they should be 
involved. My brother Neil has an accelerated form of dementia which is also 
commonly seen in Down’s syndrome. He has challenging medical needs including 
epilepsy and diabetes. He also has absolutely no ability to make decisions 
about his treatment. My mother and I are his guardians and are involved in all 
aspects of his care.

If Neil was admitted to hospital in future and he had a Do Not Resuscitate 
(DNR) completed, I would want to be involved in this decision. This does not 
mean my permission needs to be sought; resuscitation is a medical treatment and 
ultimately the decision to withhold it is one that rests with the responsible 
physician. Forcing family members into deciding on a complex medical 
intervention is unfair.

 If Neil lived away from his family, was bed bound and could only be fed via a 
tube, a DNR order would be appropriate. I speak only for my brother, but if 
someone currently so full of energy became bed bound and unable to eat due to 
his dementia progressing, he would not have any reasonable quality of life and 
I would not want to prolong his suffering.

People with even profound learning disabilities can lead full and active 
lives. Treating them can be challenging but immensely rewarding. Including 
their family and carers is imperative, as no one can advise medical 
professionals better about a patient’s quality of life than those who know them 
best.

The charity Mencap has highlighted what they see as failings within the NHS 
leading to premature deaths of people with learning disabilities 
<https://www.mencap.org.uk/news/article/public-loses-faith-nhs-failing-people-learning-disability>
. This is a worrying finding and one I hope leads to additional training for 
healthcare professionals, to avoid upsetting patients and family members by not 
communicating properly.

We all want the best for our loved ones. As a doctor and as a brother, my 
priorities are the same. It is important to consider the future and realise 
that, especially in learning-disabled patients, end of life decisions are 
multi-faceted. If a doctor broaches the topic of resuscitation, they are doing 
it in the best interests of their patient. Resuscitation is not a panacea and a 
DNR does not mean withdrawal of treatment. Our objective is to heal the sick, 
but when we are unable, to prevent suffering.

Conversations about death are not as frequent as they should be in the UK. 
With appropriate preparation, hopefully we can all achieve a good death. All 
that remains should be fond memories, rather than unpleasant disputes with 
hospitals or care homes.


If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
