
'That's 70,000 meatballs a month. Each meatball weighs 30g. There are three 
meatballs per portion. Each portion costs 35p."

You'd be forgiven for thinking that I was talking to the manager of some 
state-of-the-art production line churning out dire cook-chill gear for Tesco or 
some such. But, no, I was in a converted byre at Lower Hurst Farm, surrounded 
by the rolling hills of the Peak District, and I was chatting to Andrew Sebire, 
architect, property developer, fisherman, farmer and now maker of meatballs.

Not just any old meatballs, mind, or he wouldn't be in this column. These 
meatballs are made from the forequarter joints of Sebire's organic pedigree 
Hereford cattle which feed on the lush grasses that grow on his 280-odd acres 
on the upper reaches of the River Dove. They are delicious beasts, with square 
heads, deep bodies, curly coats like astrakhan, and the colour of malted 
chocolate and cream, as if someone had poured a bucket of their own rich milk 
over their heads and front legs.

Lovely though these animals are alive, it's their future dead that I find most 
interesting. Sebire and Dave Broadhurst, his butcher, have agreed to supply the 
primary schools of Derbyshire and Cheshire with organic meatballs for school 
lunches. And not just meatballs: there are burgers, too, and diced beef for 
stewing. Think of it - your kids eating prime British organic beef at school. 
That's not too shabby.

"You shouldn't really be writing about us, though," Sebire said. "The real 
story is about the county councils - they decided to go down this path. Most of 
the public sector don't believe it's possible, but it is if you've got the 
right attitude." This shows how far some people in charge of our school food 
have come in the past few years - they have grasped the point that feeding kids 
isn't about Turkey Twizzlers, burgers made from mechanically recovered meat 
slurry and chips. Sebire's meatballs consist of 70% meat, plus basil, onions, 
breadcrumbs, parsley and seasoning. Each is the size of a small plum and you 
can smell the fresh parsley in it even when it's frozen.

It wasn't an easy transition. Sebire describes a painful courtship, as each 
party came to terms with the other's culture. For example, the good procurers 
of council food were ignorant about the realities of raising cattle - Lower 
Hurst Farm can't produce all the beef needed to fulfil the contract, so they 
buy more from other Soil Association-approved farms. Sebire, too, had to come 
to terms with the financial realities of school budgets, and there was a great 
deal of haggling over what he could provide for a given price. And then there 
was the way they were to be cooked and served.

The deal has changed the economics of Lower Hurst Farm; similar deals could 
change the financial realities of other farms. Farmers need certainty. They 
need to be able to plan. It takes two to three years to bring an animal to a 
point when it can be slaughtered and sold, and so recoup the investment in it. 
So the assurance of a market for some of Lower Hurst Farm's meat is a useful 
start.

There are other considerations, too. We all like to eat the primary cuts - 
rump, sirloin, fillet, ribs - but aren't so fond of shin, forequarter and 
skirt. The meat's just as good, it just takes a bit more wit to cook it. So the 
ability to turn these secondary cuts into healthy food for children at a 
guaranteed price provides the financial bedrock to go on investing in more 
high-quality beef.

Not everything is rosy, though. The prices of animal feed, fuel, etc are 
rising sharply, and with them the costs of raising the animals and so of the 
meat. The good councillors of Derbyshire and Cheshire will have to grapple with 
the rising cost of food just as the rest of us will. Let's hope they keep their 
nerve, and spur on other authorities to follow suit.
