
Before football managers received the full celebrity treatment, a sure sign 
that their jobs were on the line was when their chairmen publicly expressed 
full confidence in their abilities. It is generally only when things are in 
doubt that they need to be explicitly reaffirmed.

And thus the government’s argument that its new higher education bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/the-guardian-view-on-the-higher-education-white-paper-the-customer-is-always-ripe-for-fleecing>
 will give legal backing to both academic freedom and institutional autonomy, 
as well as supporting research, needs to be treated with caution and a good 
dose of cynicism.

Many parliamentary bills read like Soviet-era diktats. In clause piled on 
sub-clause, secretaries of state give themselves powers that they claim 
(and may even believe) they do not really want and will hardly ever use. Even 
by these low standards, the present bill is a shocker. Does the secretary of 
state really need powers of “entry and search”?

Related: Universities are losing their sense of public responsibility and 
social purpose | Peter Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/06/public-universities-becoming-corporate-losing-social-purpose>

Ministers will now have the power to revoke the royal charters of many older 
universities previously regarded as near-inalienable. Now they can be stripped 
of the right to award degrees. All universities, not just dodgy for-profit 
colleges, will in effect “serve at the pleasure” of politicians, prey to all 
kinds of political pressure and buffeted by every passing ideological whim.

This, and many other new powers conferred on the secretary of state, are being 
justified on the grounds that they are necessary to protect the interests of 
students as “customers” in the new market regime. It is a regime that is part 
Brave New World and part Alice in Wonderland. The interests of students are 
also being “protected” by making them pay higher and higher fees and incur 
escalating levels of mortgage-style debt far into their futures.

Buried under this mound of new regulatory powers are a few limp restrictions 
intended to protect academic freedom and institutional autonomy. But the whole 
thrust is to do precisely the opposite by making universities more accountable 
– to students notionally, but really to politicians. With the introduction of 
theTeaching Excellence Framework 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/teaching-excellence-framework-university-tef-student-data-higher-education>
 a new tyranny of metrics is actively being prepared.

As for the “dual-support” system for research, it is beyond repair. Its 
purpose is – was – to give universities free money in their core funding to 
pursue curiosity driven research, alongside money earmarked for specific 
projects from research councils, charities and governments. Currently this 
supposedly free money is ruthlessly managed to secure optimal outcomes in the 
Research Excellence Framework (REF) and most funding for teaching is provided 
separately through student fees. The so-called protection in the bill is a 
smokescreen to conceal the fact that, in England, both types of research 
funding will now come from a single body, the new conglomerate, UK Research and 
Innovation (UKRI).

Related: Hefce is a crucial buffer against ministers’ meddling with 
universities | Peter Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/30/hefce-buffer-ministers-universities-higher-education-funding-council-for-england>

So this is a bad bill. It is also a muddled bill. The Office for Students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/students> (OfS), which will replace the 
Higher Education Funding Council for England (Hefce), will take over the 
funding council’s learning and teaching responsibilities, the most significant 
of which is funding for science, engineering, medicine and other high-cost 
subjects.

How can a regulator and the supposed protector of students’ interests, OfS’s 
prime role, also be a funder of institutions? The conflict of interest is 
blatant. It is as if Ofcom also funded TV programme-making or Ofgem ran power 
companies.

The bill is also a devolutionary mess. Scottish and Welsh universities will 
continue to receive core research funding from their funding councils, which 
have not been abolished. But English universities will receive theirs from 
UKRI, which confusingly will also house the UK-wide research councils. The UK 
may hang together, just about; the UK higher education system is falling apart.

What can be done to prevent this bill becoming law? Not much, although 
well-intentioned amendments will be put in the House of Lords (and even 
Commons) and a few may be passed. But this relative impotence is no excuse for 
failing to hammer home the point that our universities are being forced down, 
in the title of a famous book by Friedrich Hayek (perhaps on the bookshelf of 
the higher education minister, Jo Johnson?): The Road to Serfdom.
