
The children and social work bill, included in Wednesday’s Queen’s speech 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/18/cameron-places-social-reform-at-centre-of-queens-speech>
, promises key changes for children’s services. Under the bill, adoption would 
be prioritised over short-term foster care placements, and a new care leavers’ 
covenant would be introduced to provide young people leaving care with better 
support.

The government said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524040/Queen_s_Speech_2016_background_notes_.pdf>
 the bill would “tackle state failure and transform the outcomes of children in 
care, so that we give all of them the hope of a better future”.

The announcements – many of which were trailed over the weekend – have 
provoked discussion in the social care sector. Tweet us your views on
@GdnSocialCare <https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>, or leave a comment below 
this article.

Responses from the sector

Kevin Williams, chief executive of the Fostering Network: “While the Fostering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/fostering> Network welcomes the prime 
minister’s self-declared ‘unashamedly pro-adoption’ stance, and his subsequent 
backing of this stance in his government’s legislative agenda as set out in the 
Queen’s speech, we ask the government to understand that adoption and foster 
care are not mutually exclusive. On behalf of the vast majority of children in 
care, who will spend their childhoods in loving, stable and secure foster 
families, we call on this government to be unashamedly pro foster care as well.

 “Adoption may be the best route to permanence for some children, and we have 
no doubts that post-adoption support should be improved. However it will always 
be a small minority of children in the care system for whom adoption is the 
most appropriate route to permanence. The vast majority of children in care 
will live with foster families, some of whom will spend their whole childhood 
with one foster family. The prime minister is right to want to give children 
who may be adopted every chance of a positive future, yet his approach only 
focuses on a minority of children in care – and that does all children a 
disservice.”

Javed Khan, chief executive of Barnardo’s: “Barnardo’s has long called for 
support to be extended for care leavers until they are 25 years, so this 
improvement is welcome. Young people leaving care don’t have a parent to guide 
and support them into adulthood and can be more vulnerable due to the 
instability they’ve faced in their lives.

“What we’d like to see now is a firm commitment from government to measuring 
outcomes for care leavers, as that transparency could then drive further 
progress. There are other huge gaps in support for care leavers, such as having 
the right accommodation and support with education, employment and training.”

Matthew Reed, chief executive of The Children’s Society: “We know that the 
life chances and outcomes for care leavers are significantly worse than for 
those who have not grown up in care. The government must address the problem of 
children in care being uprooted and moved miles away from their communities. It 
must also make sure care leavers get priority and consistent access to mental 
health support to tackle the significant disadvantages faced by those growing 
up in care.”

Imelda Redmond, chief executive of 4Children: “Today’s Queen’s speech outlined 
the government’s welcome commitment to helping the most disadvantaged through 
the new life chances strategy.

“The government committed to ensuring public services better help the hardest 
to reach. Children’s centres are well placed to support all families, from 
those who require universal services and light touch support to those on the 
edge of crisis in need of more targeted help – a trusted resource, rooted in 
local communities, which bring a range of services and professionals together 
under one roof.”

Dan Scorer, head of policy at Mencap: “This Queen’s speech committed the 
government to “tackle poverty and deprivation” and improve life chances of the 
most disadvantaged. Disabled people and their families are some of the most 
disadvantaged in our society, with 20% of families with at least one disabled 
member living in poverty, yet there was no mention as to how these inequalities 
would be addressed.

“People with a learning disability have seen the support they receive heavily 
reduced from severe cuts to benefits and social care, and despite the 
government’s manifesto commitment to halve the disability employment gap among 
disabled people there has been no clear action.”

Andrew Isaac, spokesperson for the Children’s Services Development Group: 
“CSDG warmly welcomes the government’s continued clear and transformative 
commitment to improving children’s services. New standards for local 
authorities as ‘corporate parents’ is a step in the right direction. CSDG has 
been constructively engaging with the government over a long period to 
highlight the entrenched bias that exists as a result of local authorities 
being both the commissioner and the provider of children’s services.

This relationship invariably means that children are placed in services 
perceived to be the lowest cost, rather than those which best meet their needs. 
We hope this renewed focus on ensuring authorities act as a ‘corporate parent’ 
will improve placement decisions and long-term outcomes.”

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
