
My kitchen is … not that interesting to look at! I’ve cooked in a lot of 
kitchens, and I guess I’m just not that attached to how things look. I just get 
messy and get into what I’m doing. I live in a small house in the Nagano 
prefecture in Japan and the kitchen is tiny and quite dark. Only one person can 
work in there at a time, so I tend to work in the dining room.

My favourite kitchen tools are … my measuring spoons. I have five or six sets, 
some utilitarian, some more decorative – I don’t seem to be able to hold back 
when I see a new set. My most useful tools, though, are my cooking chopsticks. 
Working without them would be hard.

My storecupboard staple is … rice, obviously. When I was growing up I ate rice 
for every meal, every day. And as a grown-up, it’s still a constant. I don’t 
mind eating rice all the time. Japanese short grain rice can’t really be 
replaced. Any other type is an exotic alternative, but not my staple.

When I’m starving I … have rice. Whenever I cook rice, I portion it out and 
freeze it, so I always have cooked rice I can just heat up. If I have no time, 
I’ll have it withnatto <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Natt%C5%8D> or furikake 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Furikake>. I also like tamagokake gohan: a bowl 
of hot rice, with an egg cracked on top and a dash of soy sauce. You can add 
toasted sesame oil, or even olive oil and grated parmesan, or butter.

My culinary inspiration is … travelling. Going somewhere new, and seeing what 
local people eat, or travelling through books and blogs, seeing what people in 
other parts of the world are eating. I’m intrigued to try the pancakes, and the 
chilled noodles. In terms of cookbooks, Dorie Greenspan is one person I always 
go back to for baking ideas. I also love Nigel Slater, and Nigella Lawson, for 
both savoury and sweet things, and for their writing. Heidi Swanson’s 101 
Cookbooks is one of the first blogs I started reading, and I still go back to 
it now.

My best-kept kitchen secret is … collecting vegetable scraps in a Ziploc bag 
in the freezer, until I have enough to make stock. At the moment, we tend to 
use it to make our semi-daily pot of miso soup and the occasional 
Japanese-style curry. During the winter months, we practically live on warm 
soupy stews or hot pots, so we can never have enough stock. When it’s warm, we 
like to use it chilled, especially as a base of dipping sauce for chilled 
noodles.

Related: My kitchen, my inspiration: Thomas McCurdy | | Kitchen encounters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/21/my-kitchen-inspiration-thomas-mccurdy-kitchen-encounters>

My current obsession is … Home-cooked Korean food. I recently went to Korea 
for the first time, and I’ve been reading Jordan Bourke’s book, Our Korean 
Kitchen, which I find fascinating. Both these things have led me to explore 
Korean food more.

Everything tastes better with … good fat: oil, butter, toasted sesame oil – 
you don’t need to be indulgent: a little bit can go a long way.

When I go shopping I … am definitely not organised. I like to go to markets 
and be guided by what looks good. I like to find beautiful things. And I also 
just love grocery shopping – especially when I’m travelling.

For dinner tonight … it’s mountain vegetable season, so I’m having pan-fried 
spaghetti with alpine leeks (similar to ramsons), with parmesan cheese and
shichimi togarashi(Japanese seven-spice mix), followed by roasted rhubarb with 
ice-cream for dessert.

 * Chika Yoshizaki is a food blogger and photographer based in Japan; 
shewhoeats.blogspot.com. She will be taking over the @guardian_cook Instagram 
account this weekend 