
Culture secretary John Whittingdale told the House of Commons that “the BBC is 
and must always remain at the very heart of British life” (Report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/director-general-fears-ministerial-influence-over-bbc-in-white-paper>
, 13 May). But the white paper tells a different story.

It allows the BBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to contract out all 
of its production, except news, thereby losing most of the staff, skills and 
expertise that has underpinned its success.

Ofcom <http://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>, an organisation designed to 
promote commercial communications, will now oversee the relationship between 
the BBC and the market. As such it is likely to be far more receptive to the 
pressures from the commercial sector for the BBC to curtail its activities.

The BBC must now consider whether subscription “could provide a more 
sustainable funding model in the longer term”. This is clearly the direction of 
travel long advocated by those wishing to see the corporation withdraw from 
popular programming and provide only content the market deems unprofitable.

Let us hope that when the white paper is debated in parliament, the government 
is forced to reconsider this approach. Otherwise the BBC will become a small, 
subscription-funded, organisation with few viewers and even fewer supporters.
Emeritus Professor Tom O’Malley
Aberystwyth University

• The BBC director general has welcomed the new white paper’s requirement for 
the corporation to be “distinctive” and “innovative”. But I’m concerned about 
how the culture secretary counterposed distinctiveness with the mere chase of 
ratings in his Commons speech. Could this be Whittingdale’s way of indicating, 
together with his demand for “transparency” around top performers’ pay, that 
the BBC should butt out of popular programming? Couched in the language of 
concern for quality and the dangers of descending to mere entertainment, the 
aim seems to be to leave the big ratings stuff to the market and for the BBC to 
concentrate on higher matters for niche audiences.

But ever since its monopoly was broken by the introduction of commercial TV in 
the 1950s, it’s been an economic necessity for the BBC to keep an eye on 
ratings – if only to justify the universal licence fee. Notwithstanding, the 
BBC has managed to sustain what the 1962 Pilkington report on the future of 
British broadcasting described as broadcasting’s key purpose, the “widest 
possible range” of programming, offering a very broad mix that has been both 
popular and distinctive. The director general needs to be much more alert to 
possible commercial cream-offs of popular programming – however well gussied-up 
in worthy “distinctiveness” talk.
Rosalind Brunt
Sheffield

• Although “distinctiveness” has been the subject of much debate, little has 
been said about the obvious unique feature of BBC – the absence of commercial 
advertisements. These can have an adverse impact on audience members and have 
been known to influence content. The absence of commercials on the BBC is 
important for audiences, accuracy and artistic integrity. When the impact of 
commercials on the behaviour of children and other vulnerable groups is taken 
into account, the value and values of commercial-free broadcasting are not only 
distinctive but essential.
Emeritus Professor Bob Usherwood
University of Sheffield

• The licence fee will go up with inflation, but the BBC’s income from public 
money is to be frozen for five years. So where will the extra money from 
the increased licence fees go?
Maggie Hamilton
Milford on Sea, Hampshire

• The BBC is being warned that its programmes should not aim to get the 
highest ratings or it will be privatised. At the same time our schools are told 
to get the highest ratings or they will be privatised. What a strange world we 
live in.
Ron Brewer
Old Buckenham, Norfolk

• If the BBC is independent, why is the government putting its nominees on its 
board?
Tim Ward
London

• Surely BBC licence payers should decide who gets on the new unitary board to 
run the BBC?
Carmel Cadden
London

• It is odd that the newspapers which screamed that the Leveson proposal for a 
watchdog to make sure that the press-appointed ombudsman was working properly 
was government interference with the freedom of the press are now strangely 
quiet about government plans to appoint half the members of a new BBC governing 
body and interfere with the corporation’s finances. Where are the demands for 
freedom from government interference now?
Adam Leys
London

• The government will be hoping that, having backed off from the proposal to 
flood the BBC board with government appointees, the decision to restrict their 
representation to no more than half will be accepted with a sigh of relief. But 
to make even one government appointee, in the absence of a corresponding 
representative from the opposition benches, inevitably compromises the BBC’s 
impartiality. Indeed, why do we need politicians on the BBC board at all? And, 
if politicians, why not teachers, doctors, nurses, lawyers?
Tim Shelton-Jones
Brighton

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
