
The demand for £300,000 incurred by the MP Andrew Mitchell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> in the immediate 
aftermath of the plebgate libel action is a sharp reminder of why so few 
defamation cases make it to trial in the high court. The Tory politician could 
ultimately face a bill of up to £1.5m.

Three top-class legal teams were involved in gathering evidence, researching 
legal precedents and refining arguments for the best part of a year. The 
combined expenditure of the legal action may prove to be as high as £3m.

Preparations involved four preliminary pre-trial judgments – establishing what 
could be presented in the hearing – and culminated in a battle royal before Mr 
Justice Mitting that lasted almost two weeks at the Royal Courts of Justice in 
London.

Libel has invariably been the pursuit of the wealthy and those fortunate 
enough to have the support of well-resourced backers.

The police officer in this case, Toby Rowland, was funded by the Police 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation, an organisation experienced 
in funding legal actions by its members.

Legal aid is not usually available for libel claims, though the European court 
of human rights ruled that the denial of legal aid to David Morris and Helen 
Steel in the McLibel Two case constituted a breach of their rights to a fair 
trial and to free expression. The two campaigners, who were being sued by the 
McDonald’s food chain, represented themselves in court.

The extent of Mitchell’s liabilities are complicated by the fact that his 
solicitors, Atkins Thomson, said they would represent him on a no-win, no-fee 
basis after they were late filing estimates to the court. They had previously 
submitted a £506,425 costs budget for the case.

Mitchell’s side was said to have run-up expert fees of more than £150,000, 
obtaining advice and testimony about what was said at the gates of Downing 
Street. The Police Federation costs alone are believed to be almost £1m.

The former Tory chief whip is facing an interim order to pay £300,000, to be 
shared between the Sun newspaper and PC Rowland, by 3 January. The judge, 
Mitting, indicated that Mitchell might only have to pay one set of costs since 
only one factual circumstance was in dispute. But a further costs hearing has 
been scheduled for the new year when the precise extent of his liabilities will 
be fixed.

Nigel Tait, a partner at the leading libel law firm Carter Ruck, estimated 
that the MP could end up paying £1m-£1.5m.

Tait explained: “Part of this case, against the Sun, was funded by a no win, 
no fee agreement but Mitchell was paying his solicitors for his defence against 
[Rowland]. He certainly won’t get any change out of £1m.

“The judge found that he did say the words so his own lawyers may be able to 
come after him. Usually libel cases are about something more important. No win, 
no fee arrangements are still available for claimants and defendants in libel 
cases but the government is reviewing it.

“If no win, no fee is abolished, middle-income people will no longer be able 
to contemplate suing newspapers. There are too many defences. The number of 
libel cases has dropped considerably. In 1995, there were 560 claims; last year 
there were only 142.

“A lot of that fall is to do with newspapers being more careful. Perhaps they 
may become braver with the new Defamation Act [which has a higher threshold for 
establishing damages].”

Dominic Crossley, a leading privacy lawyer and partner at the law firm Payne 
Hicks Beach, said: “This is a devastating judgment for Mitchell and vindication 
for PC Rowland and the Sun. It is rare that cases such as these come to trial, 
because the stakes are so high, but all three parties in this case held their 
nerve and left it to Mitting to decide.

“The case essentially turned on who the judge believed, and, unfortunately for 
Mitchell, he was not able to demonstrate the truth of his account when compared 
to the evidence of the police officers involved. Mitchell will have to learn to 
hold his tongue.”

Both Desmond Browne QC, who represented Rowland, and James Price QC, for 
Mitchell, are both old Etonians and each comes from thesame set of chambers, 5RB
 <http://www.5rb.com/> which specialise in media and entertainment law.

The Mitchell case is likely to bolster the argument that a cheaper and faster 
system of press and media complaints is required. The real winners in this 
case, the public is likely to conclude, are the libel lawyers.

• This article was amended on 2 December 2014. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that legal aid “was eventually awarded in the McLibel Two case”.
