
A cabinet minister has said he has “every reason to suppose” the Conservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> properly reported their 
2015 general election expenses amid allegations the party breached campaign 
spending rules.

Greg Clark, the communities secretary, said investigations into elections were 
a regular occurrence after Gloucestershire police launched an inquiry into an 
allegation of electoral fraud relating to the 2015 poll.

Related: Conservative party under investigation over South Thanet campaign 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/18/coservative-party-under-investigation-over-south-thanet-campaign>

The force would not be drawn on which constituency or constituencies the 
allegation may refer to, or even to which party.

The Conservatives have faced claims that accommodation costs of activists 
bussed into key constituencies around the country should have been recorded 
under individual candidates’ limits, rather than as part of the national 
campaign.

Clark told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “For elections, there are often 
investigations as to how things have been conducted. I have every reason to 
suppose that the arrangements that we had and all parties had with national 
battle buses, they get reported in the required way.

“The Electoral Commission oversee these matters, it’s right for them to make 
their own assessment.”

The Gloucestershire police inquiry comes after the Electoral Commission met 
police and prosecutors on Wednesday in an attempt to ensure they do not run out 
of time to launch possible criminal investigations into Tory funding of the 
2015 general election campaign.

The commission believes its investigation into alleged breaches of reporting 
obligations will take at least another month, potentially taking it past the 
one-year time limit for launching criminal proceedings.

The claims relating to Conservative spending, covering the general election 
and three parliamentary byelections, were first raised by the Daily Mirror and 
Channel 4 News.

The party has blamed an “administrative error” for failing to register some 
accommodation costs, while David Cameron has insisted it was right to include 
such expenditure as part of the national campaign.
