
Norfolk Street Bakery

You have to be confident in your bread – supremely confident in the quality of 
all your ingredients, in fact – to serve a sandwich as simple as Serrano ham 
and plum tomatoes on brown bread, dressed only with olive oil. This new 
Portuguese-owned artisan bakery is rightly bullish. Each element of that 
sandwich sang with flavour, the daisy-fresh bread, particularly, packing a real 
rustic punch. Beyond A1 sandwiches (say, piri-piri chicken and seasonal field 
greens; slow-roast pork loin and apple sauce), its range includes all manner of 
meringues, doughnuts, tarts and possibly the finest pastel de nata this side of 
Lisbon (£1.50). Often clumsily reinterpreted, here these were the real deal: 
the cinnamon-spiked custard rich and creamy, the pastry paper-thin but 
perfectly crisp.
• Sandwiches £3.50. 89 Norfolk Street, 01223 660163, 
facebook.com/Norfolk.Street.Bakery 
<http://www.facebook.com/Norfolk.Street.Bakery>

Kingston Arms
 Kingston Arms, Cambridge 
This 13-pump real ale hotspot (a boozer of vintage charm, all hop-strewn bar, 
painted Anaglypta ceiling and beery bric-a-brac), has a sound rep for its food 
and a keen sense of economic realities. Alongside its main menu, it runs a 
short populist recession carte (eg. omelette and salad, bolognese, ham, egg and 
chips, all dishes, £4.99) and always has one recession pint on, priced at 
around £1.90 to £2.30. A sample bowl of cottage pie was a solid bit of simple 
home-cooking. The beef had been patiently slow-cooked with plenty of tomato and 
onion, the smooth mash had a nice, lightly cheesy crust, and a side of 
accurately cooked, buttery vegetables suggests that the kitchen takes real 
pride in the small detail of its output. A pint of Thornbridge's Jaipur (£3.90) 
was in superb, almost fierily, hoppy form. Many of the dishes on the Kingston's 
main menu (sausage'n'mash, ploughman's) also come in at just under £10.
• Recession dishes, £4.99, mains £7.95-£13.25. 33 Kingston Street, 01223 
319414,kingston-arms.co.uk <http://www.kingston-arms.co.uk>

Massaro's
 Massaro's cafe, Cambridge 
Cambridge coffee geeks get their kicks at either Hot Numbers (students, 
Vampire Weekend on the stereo) or Massaro's (professionals, vocal jazz). Hot 
Numbers (Unit 6, Dales Brewery, Gwydir Street, 01223 359966,
hotnumberscoffee.co.uk <http://www.hotnumberscoffee.co.uk>), which roasts its 
own beans and offers all the latest pour-over filter and siphon third-wave 
coffee serves, just edged it cup-for-cup. A silky flat white was excellent, 
full of chocolate and caramel flavours, but capped by a quietly bitter edge. 
However, Massaro's food, a limited but high-quality selection of homemade 
cookies, cakes and gourmet organic sourdough sandwiches, makes it, overall, the 
superior lunch destination. "Not just a sandwich", claims an A-board by the 
door, illogically. But you will get the point when you taste Massaro's Isle of 
Mull cheddar with roasted tomatoes and green tomato chutney, or its roasted 
Gloucester Old Spot with its apricot and ginger relish. Hot Numbers, for its 
part, does breakfast items, surprisingly good grilled panini (£4.80) and 
carries cute cakes from several local bakeries, including Fitzbillies, see 
below.
• Coffee from £1.80, sandwiches £4.80. 85 Regent Street, 01223 314230, 
@newmassaros <https://twitter.com/newmassaros>

Zhonghua Traditional Snacks
 Zhonghua Traditional Snacks Chinese, Cambridge 
Cambridge isn't short of Chinese restaurants, but connoisseurs swear by this 
tiny all-day space – a spartan cafe, its atmosphere lifted by its jolly, female 
staff – which specialises in freshly handmade northern Chinese street snacks: 
bite-size wonton "dumplings", filled baozi buns (think: steamed savoury 
doughnuts) and noodle dishes. The food is bright-eyed and long on big flavours. 
A dozen juicy, lightly-wrapped wonton (£5.50), were an all-singing, all-dancing 
pork, spring onion and ginger extravaganza. Although, beware that garlic 
dipping sauce. It kicks with cough-inducing intensity. Adventurous eaters could 
have a lot of fun with the specials menu, which ranged, on this visit, from 
five-spice fried pigs' ears, via "exotic plum drink", to homemade red bean 
ice-cream.
• Buns £1.20-£1.50, dishes £5-£6.50. 13 Norfolk Street, 01223 354573, 
zhonghuatraditionalsnacks.com <http://www.zhonghuatraditionalsnacks.com>

St John's Chop House
 St John's Chop House, Cambridge 
Part of a small regional restaurant group (Cambscuisine; big on local sourcing 
and beefy modern British cooking), the St John's site dates to the 17th 
century, but you would barely know it. The building has been given a typical, 
not unpleasant, "gastropub" gussy: all bare floorboards, artificially aged 
heraldic wallpaper and red leather bench seating. At lunch and between 6-7pm, 
you can eat one course off the set menu for £8. My plate of stuffed venison 
heart (subtly flavoured, livery texture) with slick mash, vibrant winter 
greens, good sweet-sharp braised red cabbage and a well-judged port sauce – not 
overly reduced, but with a distinct fruity tang – passed muster. As did a half 
of gravity-dispensed Nethergate IPA (£1.55, fresh, spicily hoppy, in a 
mid-strength 3.8% sort of way). Although, in a restaurant that raves about its 
love of real ales, only having one of four barrels on was a letdown. Other set 
mains might, typically, include sausage'n'mash, roast duck leg or vegetable 
hotpot.
• Set menu, one course £8, two courses £11. 21-24 Northampton Street, 01223 
353110,cambscuisine.com <http://www.cambscuisine.com>

Stickybeaks

A hive of making and baking activity, this upmarket, somewhat vanilla 
city-centre cafe is popular with office workers and Cambridge's new mums. It is 
renowned for its cakes – mincemeat and oat strudel slice, hunks of rocky road, 
butterscotch layer cake – which are as pretty as the proverbial baking cookery 
book picture. A slice of chocolate cola cake, however (£3, the icing's cola 
zing modest), was a little bland. Bad choice? Perhaps. Much better were two 
salads: chickpea, butternut squash and feta; and mangetout and petit pois, 
dressed with orange zest and toasted hazelnuts. Elsewhere, the lunch menu might 
include beef bourguignon, smoked mackerel and pea frittata, a puy lentil 
lasagne or a leeks and cream cheese salmon en croute. Pair one of those with a 
salad and Stickybeaks won't work out cheap, exactly. But if you value 
conscientious cooking, you certainly won't feel short changed.
• Snacks £1.50-£4.50, lunch dishes with salad around £6.50-£7.50. 42 Hobson 
Street, 01223 359397,stickybeakscafe.co.uk <http://www.stickybeakscafe.co.uk>

The Sea Tree
 The Sea Tree, Cambridge 
This "alternative fish bar" has picked up a raft of awards since it opened in 
2008. Sustainability and, to a degree, local sourcing (for instance, its 
Cumberland sausage comes from the Mill Road butcher, Northrop's) are the order 
of the day. Its menu also roves far beyond the chippy staples to take in 
battered, grilled or pan-fried mackerel and rainbow trout, as well as specials 
such as hot-smoked salmon with new potatoes or a whole Whitby crab thermidor, 
chips and salad (£10.95). Judging from this visit, good as it is, I wouldn't 
quite rank the Sea Tree among the very best of Britain's new wave chip shops. 
My cod (served with its gelatinous skin-on, a bizarre practice in my book) 
wasn't cooked to order as advertised, and, consequently, in patches, the 
otherwise delicate, crisp batter was going ever so slightly soggy inside. 
Normally, it wouldn't have warranted comment, but, at this level, you're 
looking for perfection. That quibble aside, the fish was sweet and fresh; a 
homemade tartare sauce sharp and chunky; the chips proper chip shop chips. That 
is, thick-cut, buttery-soft within and boasting a sticky, caramelised crunch 
and chew without. Those glassy, shattering, triple-cooked chips you get in 
restaurants may be a technical masterpiece, but they don't work in a fish 
supper. If not quite revelatory, then, the Sea Tree is clearly a cut-above.
• Fish and chips, from £5.55. 13-14 The Broadway, Mill Road, 01223 414349, 
theseatree.co.uk <http://www.theseatree.co.uk>

Yippee Noodles

If you are determined to swerve "clone town" Cambridge, this bright, friendly 
pan-Asian canteen makes a tasty alternative to Wagamama. The mains split 
between zippy stir fries, rice dishes and noodle soups (ramen, hot'n'sour 
etc.). Also, keep an eye out for the week's bargain specials, such as spicy 
minced pork and chicken cooked with aubergines, courgettes and tofu over rice 
(£6.90). Stir-fries are often sweet, greasy and gloopy, but, here, the 
signature Yippee noodles taste fresh and well-balanced. The house sauce is 
understated, a restrained base framework of BBQ flavours. That lets the other 
elements: hints of flash-fried wok char, still crunchy veg, a generous helping 
of prawns, spicy roast pork and chicken, shine through. On a cold day, it was a 
robustly satisfying plate of food.
• Mains £7.60-£11.80. 7-9 King Street, 01223 518111, yippeenoodlebar.co.uk 
<http://www.yippeenoodlebar.co.uk>

Fitzbillies
 Fitzbillies, Cambridge 
This bakery-cafe is justly famous for its plump, syrupy Chelsea buns – great 
sticky, Danish-like swirls of dried fruit, cinnamon and joy. When Fitzbillies 
came under threat of closure, last year, it seemed as if said buns were toast, 
but food writer (and sometime Guardian contributor), Tim Hayward and his wife, 
Alison Wright, stepped in and Fitzbillies was saved. The duo have retained 
Fitzbillies best bits (vintage 1922 frontage, those buns), while adding a 
counter-service corner coffee bar, expanding the cake range and modernising its 
table-service cafe. The emphasis at lunch (weekend evenings Fitzbillies serves 
a more ambitious menu) is on rugged, fuss-free, British seasonal snacking. 
Think St John simplicity, only with jazzier aquamarine wall tiles. You will 
find things such as egg and bacon pie, confit duck and flagelot soup, potted 
venison with crab apple and rosehip jelly, chalked-up on the boards. An 
individual Jerusalem artichoke, sage and Lincolnshire Poacher tart, served with 
a salad of hen potatoes and roasted red onions in a caper and herb dressing – 
not a huge portion – looked a little lost on its big white plate, but the 
flavours were true, the execution crisp. This quality is clearly not lost on 
visitors and locals. On a Thursday lunch time, Fitzbillies was packed out. Two 
waiting staff, both remarkably affable under the circumstances, were only just 
keeping this whirlwind in check. Pause momentarily, put your cutlery down, and 
you may well find one of them trying to whip your plate away. It could be more 
relaxing but, then, the food would probably be more expensive. You pay your 
money, you make your choice.
• Bakery goods, £1.80-£3, lunch dishes £5.30-£7.90. 51-52 Trumpington Street, 
01223 352500,fitzbillies.com <http://www.fitzbillies.com>

Urban Larder
 Urban Larder, Cambridge 
This colourful little deli-cafe is an artisan Aladdin's cave, the shelves 
laden with everything from handmade greetings cards to local Hot Numbers' 
coffee. Whether you're eating in or shopping for Cam Valley Orchards' apple 
juice, Radmore Farm bacon, food-wise the Larder is all about local sourcing 
from within a 50-mile radius. The daytime menu takes in sandwiches, quiches, 
Pavitt's Pies, stews and flavoursome rustic soups. Those soups can be served in 
loaves baked by Cambridge's sharpest craft baker, Loaf For Life. Bread "bowls" 
might sound a bit 1970s, but that brilliantly lactic bread is timelessly 
delicious.
• Sandwiches from £3.65, meals from £4.95. No 9 The Broadway, Mill Road, 01223 
212462,urbanlarder.co.uk <http://www.urbanlarder.co.uk>

• Rail travel between Leicester and Cambridge was provided by Cross Country 
Trains (crosscountrytrains.co.uk <http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk>). For 
more local tourism information, seevisitcambridge.org 
<http://www.visitcambridge.org>


