
We’ve all got one organisation we’d like to work for. Whether it’s because we 
feel passionate about the cause, in awe of their fundraising strategy or 
inspired by their communications, there’s always that one charity that is on 
our career bucket list.

Just a couple of years into my career, I landed the perfect role at my dream 
charity. I was filled with excitement (and perhaps a bit of smugness too) that 
I’d been chosen to work for this household name, national charity, that also 
happened to be very close to my heart.

However, just three days before starting my new job, my excitement turned into 
apprehension. I received an email telling me that the position I had been 
recruited to fill was no longer available owing to a last-minute internal 
restructure. I wouldn’t be working in the corporate fundraising team, alongside 
the people who had interviewed and chosen to work with me, but in a different 
team on a new fundraising initiative. It was a world away from the role that I 
had been so thrilled about starting.

I went on to work within a smaller organisation, where I was encouraged to 
flourish

I turned up to my first day of work with an open mind, but it didn’t take me 
long to realise I was a mere cog in the charity’s machine. The team had 
reluctantly inherited me, and had been forced to work with a private company on 
the new project. A senior manager had agreed to the contract with little 
research into the company or consultation with their staff.

I soon learnt that my opinions didn’t matter. After my first meeting with the 
company, I immediately had a huge number of safety and financial concerns, 
which I shared with my manager. Although he said he agreed with me, he did not 
want to ruffle feathers or question his manager’s decision. Staff concerns 
continued to be ignored.

My new role required frequent travel across the UK - I would be in Newcastle 
one evening, expected to be in Devon the next morning, and then back in the 
office that afternoon. There was no time for an induction programme, database 
training, or time to bond with my colleagues – but as long as I was signing up 
more fundraisers, that didn’t seem to matter. I was working for a well-known 
but ultimately faceless charity and I was feeling more and more worthless and 
frustrated that my concerns were being ignored. My confidence was shattered.

Related: I was attacked for being a fundraiser, but won't be made to feel 
ashamed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/nov/01/attacked-fundraiser-wont-be-made-feel-ashamed>

After three months, I made the difficult decision to leave. I was offered a 
number of other roles in the team, but I had fallen out of love with a charity 
I had once felt passionate about. I went on to work in a smaller organisation, 
where I was encouraged to flourish and was supported by my manager and the rest 
of the team.

I have since learned that the company we had been working with folded, leaving 
fundraisers from a number of organisations across the world with no means of 
getting home. I had been right, but because I wasn’t a well-established member 
of the team my concerns had been ignored, to the detriment of amazing 
fundraisers and their reputation.

Our organisations and roles are continuously devalued by the media, so it’s 
important we stick together.Charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> must not devalue their staff 
and make them feel they’re disposable. We may be a small part of a bigger 
picture, but without the smallest cogs, the machine will fall apart.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> anonymous 
series where charity workers tell it how it is. To pitch us an idea read our 
guidelineshere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
 and email voluntarysectornetwork@theguardian.com.
