
In Australia there is some outfit going by the name of the Productivity 
Commission <http://www.pc.gov.au> that calls books “cultural externalities”. 
Speaking as someone who, when well, writes cultural externalities for a living, 
I think it might be more efficient, from the productivity angle, if we could go 
on calling them books. But I admit that this is merely my opinion, not settled 
science. If I were advancing this opinion in the form of a tweet or comment, 
I could insert the acronym IMO, so proving that the standard dead white male 
language of Jane Austen is now being assailed not only by expansive phrases 
from institutions that wish to sound more important, but also by piddling 
abbreviations from individuals who wish to sound pressed for time.

Admittedly, some of those individuals wish to sound humble, too, and might 
even be so; but saying IMO is a counterproductive way of conveying that 
impression, because we already assume that your opinion is only your opinion. 
And saying IMHO is an even more counterproductive way of conveying it, because 
nobody who says “in my humble opinion” is any more humble than Saddam Hussein 
and Imelda Marcos dancing the tango.

Long ago in this column, I floated the idea that people wishing to cut down 
the time they spend reading below-the-line commentsshould simply not finish any 
entry that included the word “methinks” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/24/clive-james-spring-poetry-methinks>
, which is a sure sign of pomposity and idiocy recklessly compounded. Since 
then, the English language, writhing and groaning in its hand-basket, has gone 
even farther towards hell, and perhaps now is the right moment to upgrade my 
campaign by observing that people who write as if they have no time for such 
useless stuff as grammar and punctuation are inviting you to treat them as if 
you have no time for such useless stuff as listening to a bore mangle our 
beautiful language while he declares himself important.

Related: Clive James: ‘This carcinoma was starting to look like the alien that 
erupts from John Hurt’s chest’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/04/clive-james-skin-cancer-treatment-age>

Still spending most of my day out cold after recent hospital pit stops, 
I would like to feel useful, and can’t think of a better way than to help guard 
the language as it crumbles under siege from tone-deaf activists. I care too 
much about the language to say that I care passionately, because those who care 
passionately about, say, the environment have already infested the blogosphere 
with scuttling proof of their unawareness that the expression is a tautology: 
there can be no real caring that is not done from a passion. Really they are 
saying that they are full of themselves. Emma, in Austen’s cultural externality 
of that name, is the same way, until her mistakes teach her better.
