
My dad isn’t exactly a fan of Father’s Day. As far as he’s concerned, the 
whole thing is an unnecessary Americanism, a pointless counterbalance to 
Mother’s Day that doesn’t deserve to be recognised, let alone celebrated.

Every year I buy my dad a gift, and every year he accepts it in a manner that 
falls somewhere between reluctance and outright aggression. I’ve never really 
pressed him on the matter, but I suspect that, deep down, he sees fatherhood as 
its own reward. Then again, he hates Christmas too, so I can’t rule out the 
possibility that he’s just a grumpy bastard.

However, I am not my dad. Today, I get to be a Father’s Day recipient for the 
first time and I’m planning to milk it for everything it’s worth. Just you 
watch me.

I want food. I want cards. I want gifts. Basically, I want to spend the full 
day lording it around like a grotesque sort of Moonpig Caligula. This is the 
moment my entire life has been leading up to; the payoff for all my childhood 
demands for my parents to create an annual Son’s Day, back before I discovered 
that obnoxious entitlement wasn’t necessarily the most desirable personality 
trait.

Related: Here's to you, Dad: readers' Father's Day photos and stories 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gallery/2015/jun/21/heres-to-you-dad-readers-fathers-day-photos-and-stories>

The big question is what I’d most like to receive. First rule: nothing that 
has anything like “World’s Best Dad” written on it. Because, for starters, the 
last thing I want to do is put words into my baby’s mouth. Also, he’s five 
months old. He just about knows what his own hands are, so the assumption that 
he’d be able to adequately list all the fathers in the world – let alone rank 
them according to a complex series of intangible criteria – seems like a bit of 
a stretch. Besides, I’m nowhere near the World’s Best Dad. World’s Most 
Simultaneously Impatient and Guilt-Ridden Dad, maybe; or Dad Most Eager to List 
His Child’s Most Mundane Developmental Milestones in a Newspaper, at a push.

Second rule: nothing bought from the Father’s Day section of any shop. I’ve 
had to buy Father’s Day presents before, and it’s incredibly difficult when 
your dad doesn’t fit the very narrow spectrum of what dads traditionally like. 
My dad doesn’t fit it, and neither do I. I don’t want cigars, because I don’t 
smoke. I don’t want whisky tumblers, because I don’t really drink. I don’t want 
cufflinks, because I rarely go outside and I don’t want a CD compilation with 
Toploader songs on it, because I have Spotify, plus my ears are connected to my 
brain.

Also, I’m not sure that I should be given anything of substantial monetary 
value because there’s a good chance I’ll end up subsidising the first 16 to 18 
Father’s Day gifts I receive. And, as much as I like presents, I’m also a 
skinflint. Best to cut out the middleman and buy myself a Twix, or wrap up an 
old sock in newspaper and give myself that.

In fact, you know what? Now that I’ve given it some thought, I’m fine without 
any presents. Tomorrow is the perfect chance for me to hang out with my son and 
my dad, and that seems like the best gift of all. Both my grandads died before 
I was born, so this will be my first three-generation Father’s Day. Time spent 
with people you love, that’s about as good as it gets, isn’t it?

Incidentally, Dad, this column counts as your Father’s Day card. See? I said I 
was a skinflint.

@stuheritage <https://twitter.com/stuheritage>
