
Billed as the next generation of green cars, hydrogen fuel cell vehicles are 
now being mass produced and are making their way onto roads. In London, a city 
in which 2.4bn bus journeys were made in 2014-2015 and where 885,300 licensed 
hire vehicles wind their way through the streets, a switch to hydrogen could be 
significant in tackling air pollution.

Hydrogen powered vehicles offer a similar range to petrol or diesel cars – 
approximately 400 miles – and can be refuelled in something like three minutes. 
Passenger cars from some of the largest car manufacturers, the likes of Honda, 
Hyundai and Toyota, are now being made commercially, with wide-scale adoption 
the next frontier.

Hydrogen as a transport fuel has all sorts of applications but is particularly 
relevant as a low carbon alternative for back-to-base and fleet industries. 
While most cities still lack a comprehensive hydrogen infrastructure, these 
vehicles refuel at a single base location and so are well-positioned to make 
the transition. And unlike clunkier gas refuelling infrastructure, hydrogen 
infrastructure might only need to be a fraction of the size.

Related: Protecting one of our most precious resources, water 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/mar/20/protecting-one-of-our-most-precious-resources-water>

“Were I thinking about how to capture a captive market on day one, I would be 
looking for fleets of vehicles that fill up at the same location,” says Mark 
Lawson-Statham, director of corporate finance at Intelligent Energy, a company 
that develops hydrogen fuel cell technology.


“The necessary infrastructure can be relatively low-cost but it needs to be 
appropriate for the size of the vehicle pool: so in the early years, starting 
with asset-light infrastructure on existing forecourts where people are used to 
filling up their vehicles, and gradually beefing up the infrastructure to the 
point of new dedicated hydrogen filling stations as the vehicle fleet 
increases. Scaling things up incrementally means we are never asking people to 
take a huge upfront risk around the speed of adoption.”

It may prove crucial, says Lawson-Statham, that the fuel cell industry is able 
to leverage economies of scale. To this end, Intelligent Energy last year 
signed a £1.2bn deal to deploy hydrogen fuel cell power to telecom towers in 
India. Not only, the company says, could this have a transformative, greening 
impact on India’s energy market, it could also propel the development of fuel 
cells in transport elsewhere, as the cost of production comes down.


Transport for London counts two Hyundai ix35 fuel cell electric vehicles 
(FCEVs) among its fleet of operational vehicles and will soon add four Toyota 
Mirai vehicles. The authority recently launched LoCITY, a five-year programme 
to increase the availability and uptake of low-emission vans and lorries, 
including those fuelled by hydrogen. London also has a fleet of eight, soon to 
be 10, hydrogen buses, and there are currently three hydrogen re-fuelling 
stations in the city. One is solely used for the hydrogen bus fleet and two are 
publicly accessible. Three more public stations are scheduled to open in the 
city by the end of this year.

Matthew Pencharz, London’s deputy mayor for environment and energy and chair 
of the Hydrogen London Partnership, said: “By embracing this technology of the 
future, we aim to consolidate hydrogen’s role as a practical alternative fuel 
for the 21st century. With hydrogen vehicles, the only by-product is water and 
there are zero harmful tailpipe emissions, which will play a key role in the 
mayor’s vision for a low carbon London.

“London was one of the first cities to use hydrogen powered buses and we are 
now working with the industry to ensure the capital has enough re-fuelling 
stations to support the commercial rollout of these vehicles.”


Related: Supporting local markets to grow: the power of Promova 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/12/supporting-local-markets-to-grow-the-power-of-promova>

Policies related to improving air quality may prove crucial in stimulating the 
adoption of FCEVs. Replacing diesel vehicles with FCEVs could save between 
£100m and £200m a year in the cost of damage to air quality caused by vehicle 
emissions by 2050, according to UK government figures.

Those at every link of the supply chain have a duty to contribute sustainably 
to this technology and maximise its greening potential, says Andrew Hinkly, 
executive head of marketing at Anglo American Platinum, which has invested in 
innovation in this field. Hydrogen fuel cells produce energy to run an electric 
engine. Though several different types exist, the most developed is the proton 
exchange membrane fuel cell, which contains platinum catalysts.

“Platinum unlocks this technology,” he says. “The mining industry has a 
business interest in driving this technology forward of course but also, an 
interest in ensuring the sustainability of the resources we all use. This 
technology allows us to accomplish both of these objectives.”

When hydrogen is produced from sources such as spare renewable generation 
capacity or biomass, carbon emissions are eliminated entirely from the life 
cycle or “well-to-wheel” assessment. However, the vast majority of hydrogen is 
produced using natural gas therefore cleaner methods of production should be 
prioritised.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Anglo American 
<http://www.angloamerican.com/>, sponsor of the social impact hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/social-impact>
