
Just in time for the pheasant season – it begins officially on 1 October – 
I've been readingBird Brain 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk:80/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224093996>
, a good new novel by Guy Kennaway, which tells the peculiar story of an 
old-school landowner – he is the kind of man who takes a perverse pleasure in 
the stink of an ancient Barbour – called Banger. Shot in the head in the very 
first chapter, Banger is promptly reincarnated as a pheasant, at which point he 
discovers just how dumb the birds really are.

It sounds odd, and a bit cute. And yes, it is full of dogs that can talk, even 
if only to each other. But I loved it. In a way, it's a book I've been waiting 
for all my adult life, for it feels to me like nothing so much as a rather 
adult version of that other great pheasant story, Roald Dahl'sDanny, the 
Champion of the World.

One thing I have noticed is that, these days, no one seems to be terribly fond 
of pheasant. Game snobs prefer grouse and woodcock (a bird that requires both 
contacts and a fat wallet; the hardcore serve it à la française, with the head 
on the side, sliced through from brain to beak), and game phobics prefer 
chicken.

Both sides talk of pheasant's tendency to dryness, and the fact that one bird 
will feed only two people. As a result, it has become surprisingly cheap and, 
on restaurant menus, almost extinct.

I, though, am devoted to it, and around this time of year I start getting 
excited. In part, this is because I've discovered the perfect way to cook it 
(I'll come back to this). But it's a nostalgic thing, too.

When I was a girl, my father, the mushroom expert, used to earn pocket money 
by working as a beater on one of the Derbyshire estates. I remember that he 
used to come home from these day-long outings in a state of what I can only 
describe as euphoria: high, I think, on a combination of pheromones (beating is 
hard work) and the bizarreness of the scene, socially speaking (though I grant 
you that a hip flask may also have been involved).

Like the other beaters, he would attach a white flag to the end of his 
thumb-stick, the better to flush out the dafter – or perhaps I mean the wiser – 
of the birds. Except on his was written in black magic marker the words: "ONLY 
A LOUSE WOULD SHOOT A GROUSE".

This was a class observation, you understand, not some loony veggie protest. 
My father had no objection at all to the mass killing of grouse, partridge and 
pheasant. It was the people doing the shooting that he disliked.

No surprise, then, that the book of mine he liked most was Danny, the Champion 
of the World, in which a boy and his father get revenge on the weaselly local 
landowner, Mr Victor Hazell, by poaching hundreds of his pheasants shortly 
before the day of a big shoot (this, you will recall, they do by stuffing 
raisins, for which pheasants are extremely greedy, with sleeping tablets; the 
birds fall out of their roosts, and Danny and his dad have only to gather them 
up) – and, thanks to his tutoring, I came to love it the best, too.

Even today, I have only to think about its closing pages, in which the 
victorious Danny and his dad plan what they are going to cook in their new 
electric oven (pheasant first, and then roast pork, roast lamb and 
toad-in-the-hole), to feel, you know, all warm, etc etc.

Anyway, the upshot is that I have always liked, and been interested in, 
pheasants – whether they are strutting preposterously across a field, or on my 
dinner table. But how to cook one?

I have two fail-safe suggestions. If you're a stewy kind of a person, then try 
Margaret Costa's rich and retro pheasant with cider and apples, the recipe for 
which is in her classicFour Seasons cookbook.

My absolute favourite method, though, is Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall's pot 
roast pheasant with chorizo, butter beans and parsley, which is inRiver Cottage 
Every Day (his best and most useful book).

You cook the pheasant in a great pool of stock, which keeps it moist, and the 
chorizo adds a pleasing note of heat. Even better, though Hugh doesn't tell you 
so, the leftovers make for an effortless soup. Shred any remaining meat, add it 
to the juices, onions, herbs and beans and, if necessary, add a little boiling 
water.

If I were a beater, or even (dream on) a shooter, this is what I would put in 
my lunchtime flask.
