
“I wanted a family,” I heard myself say as I reached for the latch on my way 
out of the door. Pausing to look back for a moment, I found myself unable to 
meet my partner’s eyes, studying instead the whorls in the floorboards she 
knelt on, too distraught to speak. I knew what I was waiting for. A word, a 
sign – anything to break the nightmare. I’d popped back to the flat to collect 
some clothes before continuing on to work, and to find out what was happening 
to my life. Only then did I notice that she was wearing an old top of mine; the 
powder blue velour sweatshirt from American Apparel that had become a favourite 
round the house. There was the clue I was scrabbling for; the bone-deep 
reassurance of seeing your girlfriend in your clothes. It couldn’t be over, 
then. We were still going to have our child together.

If it all sounds like a scene from the climactic episode of a long-running 
storyline in a popular soap, then that’s how it felt. As though life had been 
wrenched from my control and was now being scripted by a meeting room full of 
writers in search of higher ratings. We’d been together for close to 11 years, 
having lived with each other from pretty much the moment we’d met. We had a 
flat and raised a proto-family of three beloved cats. We had always wanted 
children, and had been trying for seven months by the time we’d succeeded. 
Twenty-four hours earlier, I’d learned that my partner had in fact met someone 
else weeks previously and was now in a relationship with him. Our child was due 
in six months.

And here I was, crushed beneath the weight of a new reality.

What I experienced was a kind of delayed shock. From the very instant I 
learned the truth, the world around me was at a remove. Nausea gripped me and 
then gave way as we played out the initial confrontation. I was busy putting up 
a buffer zone between me and the truth, a reflexive act of self-preservation. 
The pain would settle in to stay over long weeks and months to come, but for 
now I was only dimly aware of what was happening. I could hear her words and 
mine, spoken as though mouthed by actors I was watching, but nothing sunk in.

Dimly, through the tumult, I was becoming aware that what would seem 
unconscionable to those who knew us in fact explained everything I’d been 
unable to put a finger on in the previous weeks. The space between us had 
become dense, as though something else was present; something that lay just 
beyond the periphery of my vision and flitted from view whenever I turned to 
look. During the weeks beforehand, small talk had dropped to the floor, the 
shorthand that was second nature evaporated, and I was left with the deeply 
discomfiting suspicion that the person I knew had been switched with a replica.

One question shouted louder than the others – was I the father?

The past and the future were gone at a stroke. The present, meanwhile, was 
choked off by an endless proliferation of questions, most of which had a direct 
bearing on my fate as a father – months from the due date. Where was I to live? 
How would we raise our child? What part would I play, how much time would I 
have? Would I really end up in exile after all this investment, pushing my 
child back and forth on the swings on a Saturday, trying just that little bit 
too hard?

One question shouted louder than any other. Instead of browsing online for 
romper suits or editing the list of names we’d had percolating for years, I 
found myself wondering if I was the father. In fact, I found myself bellowing 
that question down the phone once I’d first fled the house. It was a small 
mercy, in the end, to have that issue resolved so soon. I had my answer. It had 
been close, but she had not yet met him when the baby was conceived. But it was 
an answer to a question that was heartbreaking to have to ask.

Even in the first flush of anger, I felt the need to shield my child from it. 
The periodic rows that pockmarked the end of the first trimester were conducted 
on the phone, rather than face to face. If it was true that my child could hear 
already, and was sensitive to voices and their tone, then some feelings were 
surely best expressed from a distance. How could I bring primal rage into the 
space occupied by a child I had longed for? At a time when the most expansive 
and joyous of feelings ought to be blossoming, I was having to engage in 
restraint; an exercise in emotional damage limitation.

Behind the immediate questions sprang ranks of new, deeper concerns. We’d 
called a summit and agreed to co-parent, but with no real structure in place, 
how best to proceed? How would I maintain relations with someone who, were it 
not for the fact we’d conceived, I would surely never see again?

And, though he remained offstage for now, what about him? Was I to be 
supplanted even in my own future, and that of my child’s? How was I to retain 
primacy in the life of my firstborn, when the words whispered through the womb 
weren’t even mine? Having planned a family, had I gifted a child to another?

I wouldn’t fully readjust to the new reality until the weeks and months after 
my child was born; for the remainder of the pregnancy I shuffled through a 
surreal limbo. There were moments of madness and despair, long hours in which 
the pattern of the flock wallpaper I’d put up in the living room took form and 
rampaged through my brain. There were moments of oblivion, too; nights lost to 
drink, when my child was elsewhere, out there somewhere in the city. We’d 
partitioned the flat and spent little time there together. She used the bedroom 
while I lay in exile on the sofa. And on some mornings I would wake alone, face 
down, cheeks glued to the pine boards with snot and tears.

The nights were sleepless for a time, appetite a memory. In the mirror I saw a 
distortion, my body already eating away at its own reserves of fat to leave a 
gaunt figure, like that of a method actor engaged in a rapid programme of 
weight loss.

I felt judged, not just by my parter but all women. Was I to be denied entry 
to heart of it all – the family?

Shame and fear bobbed along in the general wash of disconnection. In time we 
agreed to co-parent, though a chasm yawned between us. On one occasion, when 
our embryonic child kicked, I remember reaching out to feel not with the hushed 
expectancy of a father, but with the cool detachment of a gynaecologist.

Now that I was to be a father, infidelity paled into insignificance almost 
instantaneously, superseded by what I felt as a violation, an incursion into my 
core, my deepest self. If the soul travels at the pace of a camel, then mine 
remained immobile under the burden for some time to come, and only my son’s 
ever evolving presence in my life was to lighten the load.

Later, the word separated was to become a kind of euphemism and not without 
its uses. Perhaps that applied for all parents who parted company, but I knew I 
was lumbered with the sheer unusualness of this. I knew I’d likely never meet 
anyone who had managed to start and finish a family almost simultaneously. I 
was surely doomed to be greeted with a quizzical “right …?” whenever I detailed 
the exact sequence of events. And the timing – always my mind came back to the 
timing. If there was a significance to it, then it lay beyond my ability to 
grasp. I felt judged, not just by my partner but somehow by all women. Having 
come this far down the road together, why was I now denied entry to the temple, 
to the heart of it all – the family?

Four years later, I live alone – sometimes with my child, as they say in the 
dating profiles. I moved out when my son was six weeks old. I’d guessed from 
the outset that my ex and her new partner would remain together and, indeed, 
they have.

There was only one rule I insisted upon – that my son be raised to call me 
Dad, and me alone

Whatever friends may have thought, however certain they were that we would 
“work it out”, I knew that for her to make such a leap at such a time meant it 
could only be serious. We agreed to co-parent and a deal of good fortune has 
allowed me to do so. I’ve remained close by ever since, initially renting a 
flat at short notice from friends, later moving to another flat when she and 
her new partner moved to a house in a neighbouring area.

We’ve somehow maintained a convenient distance of about two miles, which is 
far enough to be separated, close enough to be parents. We’re even connected by 
a scenic bike path. It works and while I’d never have chosen it, I’m not sure 
I’d change anything now. The only day I spend entirely without my son is a 
Monday. Otherwise, there’s hardly a day I don’t see him, whether he’s waking up 
at my place, staying the night or spending the day. Though I see no need to 
feel grateful to anyone to be with him, I feel blessed none the less.

“You’re the father,” friends used to say in response to a perceived injustice, 
as though the phrase were an article of natural law that carried all before it, 
its meaning and weight unassailable. In the period leading up to the birth of 
my son, those words bore no meaning beyond the stark biological facts. It was 
not for some time, until I’d held him, fed and changed him, comforted him alone 
in the night and had him live with me for almost half of his time, from the age 
of four months, that I would finally learn the meaning of those words.

I have more time with my son than many fathers ever manage, separated or not. 
The bond between us is no different to that which any loving parent enjoys. If 
anything, it’s been amplified by the fact that I’ve in effect raised him alone 
throughout that time. It’s been just the two of us.

It’s true he enjoys another parallel family life alongside this one and though 
it can feel there’s no other world beyond our own, I respect the fact that his 
world is bigger than mine. In fact, I’m grateful for it. There may be limits to 
what I can offer him for as long as I remain single after all, though I give 
him my all. It’s a situation that has offered me a unique perspective, one that 
has taught me that his welfare comes before anything, me included.

There was only one rule I insisted on when my life became chaos a few years 
back – that my son be raised to call me dad, and me alone. Now I’m not sure he 
ever needed that to be pointed out. I’m his dad, it’s who I am.

• This footnote was added on 20 June 2016: Liam Blake is a pseudonym.
