
The recipe

Peel and dice 1 red onion and put it into a small bowl with 3 tbsps of 
red-wine vinegar. Set aside for 30 minutes for the onion to soften.

Put 500ml of vegetable stock on to boil. Put 250g of couscous into a bowl 
then, when the stock is boiling, pour it over the grain, cover and set aside.

Toast 50g of skinned whole almonds in a pan till golden. Tip them into a bowl, 
add a couple of drops of olive oil and a grinding of salt then toss them gently 
and set aside.

Halve, stone and dice 2 ripe nectarines or peaches. Toss them in a little 
lemon juice to stop them discolouring. Remove the leaves from a bunch of 
flat-leaved parsley and roughly chop half of them. Leave the remaining leaves 
whole unless they are very large. Remove and roughly chop the leaves from a 
couple of sprigs of mint and mix with the chopped parsley.

Put 4 tbsp of olive oil in a small mixing bowl and stir in 1 heaped tsp of ras 
el hanout and half a tsp of ground, hot or sweet, paprika.

Remove the cover from the couscous, then run a fork gently through it to 
separate the grains. Drain and rinse a 400g can of chickpeas and fold through 
the warm couscous. Fold in the diced nectarines, the chopped and whole herb 
leaves and the onion, drained of its vinegar. Season lightly with salt then add 
the toasted almonds and divide between two plates. Trickle the ras el hanout 
and paprika dressing over the couscous and serve. Enough for 2.

The trick

Ras el hanout, the North African spice mix contains different proportions of 
spices according to who mixes it. Generally made with the sweeter spices cumin, 
cinnamon, cloves, ginger and turmeric, there is also usually a little mild or 
hot chilli too. As the spices in ras el hanout are already toasted, you can 
fork it through the grain towards the end of cooking or, as I have done here, 
directly into the dressing. It is available from most major food stores.

The twist

Plums would be an interesting replacement for the nectarines, again making 
sure they are ripe. You could also introduce some meat in the form of roasted 
chicken breast. Or perhaps jagged lumps of feta cheese that you have marinated 
for an hour in olive oil, chopped basil and mint leaves and lemon juice.


Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>

Follow Nigel on Twitter @NigelSlater  
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
