
✒Fresh from his election night party triumph over the BBC (the corporation's 
show was dubbed the "barge of bilge" by the Twitterati), ITV's chairman,Archie 
Norman <http://www.theguardian.com/media/archie-norman>, bemoaned the fact that 
the ITV board had "attracted a little too much media attention" last year in 
his first AGM. This was principally for its occasionally chaotic attempts to 
appoint a chairman (Norman) and chief executive (Adam Crozier) to succeed 
Michael Grade. "I rather hope it will be able to adopt a lower profile this 
year and let the business talk for itself," he told shareholders. "When I first 
joined I said that I recognised ITV is in the entertainment business but the 
board is not meant to be the entertainment." Ba-boom!

✒An insight, now, into the commissioning process at ITV, where its director of 
television, channels and online,Peter Fincham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/peter-fincham>, is rightly proud (probably) 
of a remake of Bouquet of Barbed Wire, a racy 1970s TV drama. Fincham said he 
watched the original, starring Frank Finlay and Susan Penhaligon, when he was a 
teenager: "I must admit, in part, because there was quite a bit of sex in it." 
Where's the Daily Mail's phone number when you need it?

✒Monkey's quote of the week: "Torture is not something one wishes on people 
lightly." Charlie Brooks, the husband of News International's chief executive 
Rebekah Brooks, in a GQ column on why "lily-livered liberals" who have taken 
against so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques", AKA torture, are wrong. 
With 24 coming to an end after its current run, is Brooks making a play to be 
the new Jack Bauer?

✒It had to happen. The only surprise is that it has taken this long. "How 
watching 3D films can be bad for your brain," warns theDaily Mail 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail>, the perennial purveyor of tales 
of the horrors of everyday living. "There are growing side effects of the 
technology, with experts warning of blurred vision, confusion, dizziness and 
even convulsions." Not unlike those occasionally experienced after reading the 
Mail.

✒So why did Radio 2's breakfast DJ Chris Evans refuse to talk to his BBC 
colleague – and former Radio 1 rival –Chris Moyles 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/chris-moyles> for last night's BBC2 
documentary, When Moyles Met the Radio 1 Breakfast DJs? Could it have anything 
to do with Moyles's prediction that Evans's first set of audience figures since 
succeeding Terry Wogan would "go through the floor"? "I just hope people switch 
off in their millions when Evans starts," said Moyles. "If he puts figures on, 
I'll burn his house down." The duelling DJs will have a chance to catch up at 
tonight's Sony radio awards, which Evans will host and where Moyles is 
nominated. Bottoms up!

✒Is this a record? Kelvin Mackenzie, the former Sun editor, was invited by 
Radio 4 to present one of its What The Papers Say election specials. And the 
first columnist he chose to quote was a rising young star, the Sun's …Kelvin 
MacKenzie <http://www.theguardian.com/media/kelvin-mackenzie>. "As I said in 
the Sun the following day, who did Brown's make-up? He looked as if he'd been 
dug up from a Rochdale cemetery." Ba-boom! Not so much What The Papers Say as 
What I Wrote In The Sun I'm Bloody Good At This Sort Of Thing Aren't I?
