
The Times’s feedback editor, Rose Wild, has explained why the newspaper 
changed its mind about its failure to mention the Hillsborough inquest verdict 
on its front page.

In her Saturday column 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/hillsborough-and-why-we-changed-the-front-page-nt2nbnpbr>
, she wrote that “as soon as the first edition of the paper went out on Tuesday 
night” the choice of page 1 stories “was called into question by, among others, 
members of the Times staff.” She continued:

“Our coverage of the ‘unlawful killing’ verdict in the Hillsborough inquiry, 
extensive as it was, was not flagged on the front, suggesting that we had 
overlooked both its significance in legal terms and its importance to the many 
people who had campaigned for this result for so long.

The paper immediately realised it had made a mistake. In the second edition 
the front page was changed.”

That accords with two Guardian reports (here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/apr/27/the-times-has-second-thoughts-about-its-hillsborough-coverage>
 andhere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/27/times-hillsborough-protest-front-page-twitter>
) that told of sports staff upset at the decision to omit any front page 
reference to the verdict. Wild explained a little more:

“The initial decision not to put the story on the front was because it had 
been running as a news story all day. But it was an error not to have a visual 
signal to the coverage inside.”

She also referred to the paper’s public statement in which it admitted making 
a mistake, which “we fixed it for the second edition.” She added:

“This isn’t something we’d usually do. The intention was to explain why the 
page was changed and to lay to rest, if possible, some of the false and 
misleading conspiracy theories bouncing around social media.”

These conspiracy theories, aired widely in Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> and elsewhere, suggested that 
with both the Times and the Sun failing to carry front page mentions of the 
verdict, it must have been a policy decision, one possibly made by the papers’ 
publisher, Rupert Murdoch.

This may have been understandable, but it was - as with most conspiracy 
theories - wrong. Murdoch would have played no part in the decision-making and 
my hunch is, that if he had, he would have preferred page 1 coverage in both 
titles. Let’s be honest: the Sun made an error too.

Wild went on to report an interesting email from a Times reader who thought 
the paper’s apology was “misguided” on the grounds that it exposed the press to 
lobby groups who feel their cause has not been given due prominence.

He wrote: “Editorial decisions should be made on newsworthiness, not on the 
basis of who might be upset (or pleased) with a particular decision.”

He may well be right in general terms. On this occasion, however, the change 
of mind occurred because of internal editorial lobbying, which is - or should 
be - part of the editorial process.

Clearly, the Times’s sports journalists were omitted from the discussion that 
led to what was, on reflection, a monumental oversight. The writers, as 
distinct from their editors, understood sensitivities among the people of 
Liverpool.
