
It took about three weeks for me to become mute. In 2007, just after 
Halloween, I’d visited the home of a client in my job as a financial adviser 
and picked up a virus. I wasn’t especially concerned when I started to 
experience cold-like symptoms, and my husky, constricted voice was more of an 
irritation than a worry. My doctor assured me it would soon return to normal.

Instead, it got worse. I could no longer make phone calls and started carrying 
a little whiteboard to write everything down. I tried to work mostly with 
people I already knew, who were likely to be more patient with me; but 
explaining financial minutiae to potential investors with marker pen was a big 
challenge.

By May of the following year, it was clear this might be a long-term problem. 
An ear, nose and throat specialist called my condition “functional dysphonia”: 
perhaps exacerbated by asthma, the muscles controlling my vocal chords had 
seized and locked. Weeks of speech therapy made no difference.

At home, my wife and teenage sons adjusted as best they could. New 
technologies helped with my day-to-day life. Soon I was using a computer that 
read out phrases typed into it – a slow process at first, and not enough to 
save my job.

My career had been a big part of my life, and losing it was a blow to my 
confidence. Friendships foundered as I turned down invitations, unwilling to 
sit in silence as conversations carried on around me. My relationship with my 
wife, Joanna, deteriorated and eventually we divorced.

My situation brightened when I was offered a tuition-assisted place at Iowa 
State University. While studying for a degree in finance, I challenged myself 
by accepting a job in the student services office, as first point of contact. 
Forced to communicate with people face to face, I started to have fun with 
computer voices. Sometimes I’d startle people by switching to a woman’s voice, 
to see their reaction.

In the summer of 2010, I received a text from my ex-wife telling me her dad 
had seen a news story about a waitress who’d had her voice restored by a doctor 
in Cleveland. It had to be worth a shot.

At the appointment, I felt some dismay as Dr Milstein performed tests I’d long 
since become familiar with. But then he said, “I might be able to help you.” It 
was the first time anyone had said that to me. We did some vocal exercises to 
stretch the muscles in my neck and to my astonishment I started to make sounds. 
It was the first time I’d heard my voice in three and a half years.

Before long, I was able to make a very quiet “m” sound, then an “e”, so I 
could say “me”. Then Milstein said, “This won’t hurt, but it might be a little 
bit uncomfortable,” and grabbed my larynx through my throat, moving it quickly 
over to one side and then pulling it down – I could hear popping noises. Then I 
did more exercises, my voice becoming more confident but higher than 
I remembered; my voice box had been pressed up against my palate and took a few 
days to regain its original pitch.

Related: Experience: I grew up in a cemetery 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/30/experience-i-grew-up-in-a-cemetery>

Milstein said, “You can do better than this: go over to the window and yell at 
that guy you can see crossing the street.” We were seven floors up and the man 
was too far away to hear, but I yelled, “Don’t cross the roaaaaad!” I was 
afraid at first, in case I damaged my voice, but the doctor kept pushing me. 
There I was, hollering at a stranger, tears streaming down my face.

Before I left his office, he said, “This problem shouldn’t recur, but keep 
talking for the next two days.” I didn’t need any encouragement. I phoned my 
parents and jokily introduced myself to them, got to thank Joanna and share 
everything I’d been thinking throughout the divorce. Friends at university 
heard my voice for the first time and even when I was alone, I talked to myself.

I don’t regret those years of silence. I spent more time with my boys and had 
time to think about where I’d gone wrong as a husband and parent. That time 
smoothed my rough edges. I prefer who I am now.

• As told to Chris Broughton

• Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:xperience@theguardian.com>
