
Our next door neighbour has half a dozen varieties of fig tree in his garden, 
on the outskirts of Toulouse. He says he can't possibly eat them all, so at the 
end of August, as they began to ripen, he started offering us some of his 
harvest.

Every few days for weeks he'd instruct us to leave a big shopping bag hanging 
on his fence, and we'd come back to find it heavy with kilos figs of all kinds 
and in varying stages of ripeness from fairly firm through to sodden and boozy.

You have to act quickly with figs. They don't travel well and they ferment 
fast, especially in the heat. Our kitchen turned into a jam and chutney 
factory. I washed, chopped and covered each batch of figs in sugar, then left 
them overnight. The following days, syrupy figs bubbled away in a succession of 
too-small pots filling the whole house with a sweet smell, and the kitchen with 
a sticky mess when the jars were filled.
We had a fig tree in the garden of our previous house in Bedfordshire and 
while every branch was covered with green figs all year round only a handful 
ever ripened properly. The few that did grow plump and ripe we would eat raw or 
bake. They were fragrant and tasty, not as flavourful as our new neighbour's 
sun-baked specimens, but there was still something exotic about them.

In some parts of the Midi-Pyrenees 
<http://www.europa-pages.com/france/maps/map-of-Midi-Pyrenees.html> region of 
France, figs form an integral part of local history. A festival dedicated to 
the fruit takes place every October in le Mas d'Azil, a village in the rural 
Ariège department an hour and a half from Toulouse in the foothills of the 
Pyrenees. It's a proper old fashioned family fair, with dancers in traditional 
costume, roaming musicians and street entertainers. There are two markets in 
the village squares under the plane trees, one for food, with a bar set up in 
the middle, and the other for handicrafts and plants. The 11th Fête de la Figue 
took place the first weekend of this month, but its origins go back to the 19th 
century when a twice-weekly market based around fig produce took place in the 
village.

Marie-Pierre Siber is president of the Confrérie Les Tindoulets de la Figo 
<http://www.arize.fr/Les-Tindoulets-de-La-Figo.html>. The name of the 
fraternity is in the local Occitan language, and literally means the 
"fraternity of the folk who are mad about figs". (Occitan usually uses the word 
"figa" but in Mas d'Azil it has always been "figo".) Standing at the 
fraternity's stand in the marketplace, she says: "You'll see that every garden 
here has a fig tree.

"Figs provided people here with sustenance through the cold months. They 
produce a large harvest of fruit without too much attention. They cope with 
cold weather and dry weather. The people would dry the figs and use them 
throughout the winter when there were no other fruits left. It gave them a 
sugary ingredient to put in cakes and bread."

Next to the fraternity's stand large copper cauldrons filled to the brim with 
whole figs simmer away. Two orchards including a range of varieties including 
the local Castex fig have been planted by the enthusiasts in the village, and 
here the harvest is being turned into jam which proudly carries theParc Naturel 
des Pyrénées <http://www.parc-pyrenees.com/> label.

"We asked the local grandmothers how they made their jam and we use their 
recipe," explains Siber. The Mas d'Azil "mamies" start with a syrup made up 
with a quarter of a litre of water and 700g sugar for each kilo of figs. They 
pour the syrup over the figs, left whole, stalks and all, and let them boil in 
the cauldron for hours on end. We taste a freshly filled jar at 2pm that has 
been boiling since 7am.
 Fig sorbet at the fig festival in le Mas d'Azil, Ariège, France. Photograph: 
Sandra Haurant 
The result is somewhere between a caramelised fig and a quite liquid jam and 
is just incredible. "The figs keep their shape so they look beautiful on the 
plate," says Siber, who recommends them with cheese, foie gras or, well, 
anything really.

On another stand, Jean-Luc Haramboure from nearby Lezet-sur-Leze sells a 
selection of fruit and plant syrups. Most are locally grown or foraged, apart 
from the thyme syrup which he picks wild near Montpellier. His sirop de figue 
is made from largely wild fruits picked on the hills around local villages 
(plus some from his farm) and sugar and water. It's delicious and, he says, 
simple to make, and 5kg produces as many as 30 bottles of thick ruby-coloured 
syrup.

The food market is overflowing with ideas. There is pain aux figues (fig 
bread), croustade de figue (a thin, flat fig pie with millefeuille pastry), 
brioche aux figues, fig tarts and sausages made with figs. Jean-Luc Mirouze, 
the baker behind the croustade de figue, says purple figs are better used in 
jam, while white figs work better in pastries.

One local Mas d'Azil woman with a table full of fresh figs, jams and jellies 
for sale from her own garden thinks he may be right, although she says it's 
really a matter of taste. "I prefer the purple ones, my partner prefers the 
white ones." As for me, I'm already looking forward to leaving a bag on the 
fence at the start of next year's season.
