
Ireland’s major media tycoon, Denis O’Brien, is rarely out of the headlines 
(although he appears a little less often in newspapers owned by the publishing 
company in which he has a major interest).

The weekend was a perfect example. The Sunday Business Post’s lead story 
reported that Ireland’s finance minister had been prepared to take a loss of 
€100m rather than sell bank loans to O’Brien. A similar story was published in 
the Sunday Independent.*

Inside the same issue of the Business Post was a story about O’Brien backing a 
start-up company that analyses people’s mobile phone habits (O’Brien is big in 
mobile phones in the Caribbean).

The Irish edition of the Sunday Times carried a story across the top of its 
business section about Independent News & Media (INM) - in which O’Brien holds 
a 29.9% stake -preparing to overhaul its balance sheet and thus restart paying 
dividends to shareholders. 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1588203.ece> 

It reported that, following the proposed capital restructuring plan, one of 
the biggest beneficiaries would be O’Brien. TheIrish Independent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-independent>, published by INM, had 
not, at the time of writing, touched on that story.

Then came Monday’s Irish Times. In what promises to be a major constitutional 
clash, it reported that O’Brienhad initiated a high court action against a 
parliamentary committee 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/businessman-denis-o-brien-takes-legal-action-against-d%C3%A1il-committee-1.2305142>
 because it did not agree (with him) that a TD (MP) had abused Dáil privilege 
by making allegations about him.

All of these are serious matters, of course. But such is O’Brien’s relatively 
new-found - and, I suspect, unwanted - fame, that he took centre stagein the 
latest Irish Times column by Paul Howard 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/life-and-style/people/ross-o-carroll-kelly-i-ve-got-to-stop-thinking-about-my-old-man-as-just-an-atm-1.2302436>
, Ross O’Carroll-Kelly.

One of the recent running jokes in Howard’s scintillating satire has been the 
adoption by O’Carroll-Kelly’s father of a haircut that resembles the 
distinctive one sported by O’Brien.

He linked that to O’Brien’s penchant for launching legal actions. Here’s a 
brief excerpt from O’Carroll-Kelly (lightly edited for a British audience), in 
which his father is speaking:

“I’ve had a cease and desist letter!” he goes, waving it at me. “From our 
friend”...

“He’s threatening me with a bloody well injunction! And I thought we were 
pals! Here, have a listen to this,” and then he starts actuallyreading the 
letter to me?

“We have been instructed by our client, Mr Denis O’Brien, to inform you that 
your current hairstyle – hereinafter referred to as ‘Denis O’Brien Hair’ – is 
the property of Mr Denis O’Brien and that your wearing of Denis O’Brien Hair is 
a clear infringement of his intellectual property rights.

“You are hereby put on notice and instructed to cease and desist from having, 
wearing and/or using for the purposes of business advancement, and/or any other 
reasons, Denis O’Brien Hair, including any related hairstyle that seeks to 
replicate the colour, shape and manner in which Mr Denis O’Brien wears his 
hair, including, without limitation, any colour that could be construed by a 
reasonable individual as ‘autumn ochre’, or any similar shade; any style that 
involves a side parting; and any volume that might be interpreted as 
‘generous-bodied’, or a variation thereof.

“Unless we hear from you in writing within three days from the date hereof, 
your receipt of this letter shall be deemed to be your acknowledgement and 
agreement to immediately cease and desist from having Denis O’Brien Hair.

“A failure to comply with the terms of this letter will result in, inter alia, 
an application for injunctive relief, pending a court action, at which our 
client, Mr Denis O’Brien, will seek damages, including punitive damages and his 
costs associated therewith, including, without limitation, all legal and 
professional costs, fees, expenses, duties and outgoings.”

I know O’Brien is very protective of his image but on the basis of a single, 
and cordial, meeting with O’Brien back in 2009, I thought he betrayed a sense 
of humour which suggests he will see the funny side of O’Carroll-Kelly’s column.


*The original posting said the Irish Independent had followed the Post’s 
story. This was incorrect. Apologies to the Sunday Independent’s special 
correspondent, Ronald Quinlan, for the error.
