
You might be my mom. Only you will know. I think about you often. I have 
visited the place where you left me, in that hedge in a beautiful straw basket 
with hand-knitted clothes, swathed in a blanket. This is where my identity was 
forged as a foundling. From that little bundle you left behind in 1965, a great 
big me was formed.

A dog sniffed me out. That day not only changed your life for ever, it changed 
the dog’s owners’ – an elderly couple who lived in that road and took me to the 
hospital after which I was named. Then I was taken to a children’s home. The 
local paper urged you to come forward, to no avail. My case was distinctive. I 
was far from newborn and had been nurtured for at least six weeks; a fact that 
remained an unresolved stress into my early adulthood.

I wonder if I look like you? Are some of my weird ways yours too? What’s 
nature or nurture – who knows? What I do know is that it’s been hard to decide 
what to include here – my experiences in care are too numerous for one letter.

Social services tried to find adoptive parents. Then I failed my pre-adoption 
medical. I quote: “This child will never walk. She shows signs of spasticity.”

Consequently, I became a long-term foster child. Months of physiotherapy began 
and a wheelchair was ordered in 1967. Those early years were tough.

I don’t want it to be your deepest regret, never knowing me, your beautiful 
daughter

My foster mom always had a small transient community of babies waiting, 
pre-adoptive, for their parents. She accomplished this in a businesslike way: 
“Love them and leave them” was her motto. I was moved around to a lot of homes 
only to be returned “to base” unwanted. Hence, my doggedly determined foster 
mother never took delivery of that wheelchair. She reluctantly project-managed 
my walking; in a letter from social services she was described as “expecting 
nothing less than perfection”. This I remember only too vividly. As I learned 
to talk, I became well versed in requesting anything out of my reach. I clung 
on contentedly to the garden gate for hours, chatting to the milkman, postman 
and passers-by.

So, the prognosis was wrong. I walked, eventually, at three, and many years 
later completed the great walk along King Offa’s Dyke – 180 miles.

Many foster children came and went, each with their own hurt and narrative. We 
functioned as a unit, nappies changed, laundry done, beds made, babies fed. I 
learned how much love I had to give and that this was always reciprocated. I 
joke now that we were all mongrels, bereft of a bloodline, which made us all 
very different.

I was quite driven to study, not what my working-class family could envisage. 
With rebellion and determination, leaving the care system at 16 seemed the only 
way. I took refuge in the YWCA to take four A-levels while I worked nights in a 
doll factory – and I haven’t looked back. I have a deep academic quest for 
knowledge and advancement. I have been fortunate to travel the globe teaching, 
published numerous articles and several academic books. I have, as they say, 
come out “on top”. I have had an exhilarating life.

I don’t want it to be your deepest regret, never knowing me, your beautiful 
daughter. We are each individually carved from our family tree, the branches of 
which makes everyone interconnected; many people before us helped to make us 
who we are. So it’s not just about the two of us. I am part of a foster family 
tree. My foster parents were catapulted without dignity, through illness and 
frailty into their older years, and events evoke deep emotions about “life”. 
You must be a septuagenarian by now and I wonder where your life has taken you. 
What stories have we got to share? This before, perhaps, the sands of time run 
out and that opportunity is lost.

I have the most wonderful husband and he often jokes, “Where did you come 
from”? I can only respond, if only I knew …

Liz Richmond
