
Let us praise the two most consistently intelligent and informative programmes 
in any media, the Food Programme and Farming Today. I get my world-view from 
both (and from this newspaper, naturally). I've written before about my debt to 
Farming Today, so now it's the turn of the Food Programme, not because it has 
any anniversary that I am aware of, but just because it is.

For those of us who grew up with it, Derek Cooper was the Food Programme. In 
fact, as far as I was concerned, he was the voice of the BBC - intelligent, 
humorous, deep and rich, like stout running over gravel. He used this 
extraordinary instrument to marvellous effect, luring unwary ministers, 
captains of industry and posturing ninnies into believing he was one of them 
before sliding the poniard below the third rib or, if necessary, bringing the 
broadsword crashing down on their startled skulls. After he retired, Sheila 
Dillon, pre-eminently among a number of presenters, carried on this noble 
tradition, combining passion with forensic research, and a disarming and 
infectious giggle.

"I was a journalist in New York," she says, "and became interested in food 
stories while there - there was a scandal about pesticide residues in foods 
when I was weaning my son. When I came back to England, I heard Derek and 
thought, 'That's for me.' The programme pushes ideas about the place of food in 
society, and it helps shape the world we live in. We went to Russia just after 
the fall of the Soviet Union and did stories about farmers in the Ukraine and 
the mafia and who was taking control of agricultural production - the history 
of the country was being laid out."

The programme's remit is intelligently broad. One week it takes in royal 
entertaining, the next it's local food networks, or African food security, New 
Orleans or fishmonger skills - anything and everything in the food universe is 
grist to its mill. And within each of those seemingly anodyne descriptions lie 
stories that uncover other, more disturbing aspects - the decline of fishmonger 
skills, the neglect of New Orleans and its inhabitants' efforts to use food as 
a means of civic regeneration, the consequences of the rise in food prices - 
each presented with exquisite filleting to present the meat of the issue. It's 
all there, the sturm und drang of everyday life, drama, economics, social 
change, international forces, personal voices.

"We try to steer a middle path, let everyone have their say," Sheila says, 
"but we are unashamedly in favour of good food. We just let the facts speak for 
themselves and let our listeners make up their own minds."

And now's the time for us to do just that. The Food Programme and Farming 
Today are gathering nominations for the Food and Farming Awards, now in their 
ninth year. They were set up "to celebrate people in the food world who are 
usually below the radar, who don't get much of a mention elsewhere," Sheila 
says. "We're looking for people who are contributing to the community around 
them. An award can make a huge difference to the success of a business. But it 
means more than that. Frequently, they struggle on their own with bureaucracy, 
public apathy, financial difficulties, technical problems. The realisation that 
they may not be alone in the world can make a huge difference. That's the side 
of the business I love, the reporting, talking to farmers, producers, 
retailers, consumers."

So get nominating for the best takeaway; best dinner lady or man; best food 
market; best local food retailer; best food producer; farmer of the year; Derek 
Cooper award (for the individual or organisation that has done most to increase 
our knowledge of good food); BBC Food Personality of the Year.

Personally, I'd nominate the Food Programme for the Derek Cooper award and 
Sheila Dillon as Food Personality of the Year, but I guess they're not 
eligible. Pity.
