
I've always said, slightly flippantly, that there are three main things that 
cause tensions within, and often finish off, a community: money, sex and 
washing up. Internal conflict invariably builds up around who gets what, or who 
gets who. Some people inevitably think that they're not receiving enough, or 
that they're doing too much.

Monogamy, goodwill and rotas deal fairly well with two of those issues. By far 
the trickiest one is money. Abolishing wonga and greed is one of the oldest 
utopian aspirations, and there are many communities that have tried to banish 
mammon. The most successful one we've witnessed is Nomadelfia in Italy, an 
incredible community of roughly 300 people where they have, internally at 
least, no financial transactions. Money is a subject that we've pondered long 
and hard, and we're trying to be both very radical and very realistic.

The cornerstone of our philosophy on such things comes from the Bible's book 
of Acts where, in the early Christian church, "no one claimed that any of their 
possessions was their own, but they shared everything they had" so that "there 
were no needy persons among them". I'm very drawn to the idea of a common purse 
into which everyone contributes and on which everyone can draw. But like 
everything else here in the woods, we're starting very small, testing our 
idealism with something much simpler: a communal kitty for food. And even that 
can be fraught with difficulties. "Who hoofed all the yogurt?" your internal 
voice asks as you find an empty fridge, or "who scoffed the Rich Teas?" Some 
people have big appetites or allergies or, as they say, "dietary requirements". 
There are debates about whether to buy cheap or quality food – Tesco or the 
farmers' market? It helps that there are only eight of us here at the moment, 
four adults and four children. But even so, you have to be pretty wise and 
forgiving and none too greedy for it to work. Otherwise, sadly, the more you 
share the more you're driven apart.

But we're all keen, in months to come, to try a common purse. We've already 
opened a partnership bank account, but it sits there with diddly-squat inside 
it. And that's probably a good thing for now: I guess we're all less likely to 
argue over 10 quid than 10K. And I suspect that debate in the near future will 
be more about how on earth to get money coming in than on what we should spend 
it. I  personally have some pretty strong opinions about ways I don't want us 
to earn money. I don't want us to charge rent to guests, because then we would 
really just be some kind of B&B, maybe right on and left field, but still 
basically a B&B. It would exclude anyone without financial resources. Guests 
could, of course, claim housing benefit, but we're even more reluctant to base 
the finances of this place on the benefits system. Charging rent would also 
make it very difficult to say to people that they they're expected to put their 
foot on a spade, that they can come here to gain new skills and maybe new 
self-esteem through the (hopefully rewarding) work that needs doing. Nor do I 
want us to become a recipient of other people's charity, putting all our energy 
into fundraising and grant applications and rattling a collection tin.

Which means we're going to have to earn money the hard way. We already run 
courses in the woods: courses in Italian cookery, spoon carving, chair making 
and so on. We sell some of the things we make, including spoons, stools and 
chairs. We've just sold our pork, and in the future the children will sell our 
eggs and honey and so on (if only the blasted bees would read the right 
textbooks). Those income streams are still tiny trickles at present, but I 
think we're all happy with that. We're enjoying a simple, pared-down lifestyle.

James Baldwin once said that money was like sex: you think of nothing else if 
you don't have it and of other things if you do. I'm kind of happy we're still 
thinking about it, constantly scratching our heads about how to make ends meet. 
The common purse, I suspect, will be more problematic when we've made our 
millions.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
