
I’ve started seeing a lot of references in fashion magazines to someone called 
Lily-Rose Depp. Who is she and why is the fashion industry so obsessed with her?

IF, Bolton

The first part of your question is easy, IF. Lily-Rose Depp is the 16-year-old 
daughter of Johnny Depp andVanessa Paradis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/vanessa-paradis>. Happy to be of Googling 
service to you! The second part, however, is going to make me work a little 
harder for my pay cheque.

I’ve written before in this column 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/nov/26/curves-flaunt-them-mail-online> 
about Mail Online’s icky fondness for featuring photos of young girls on their 
website and describing them as looking “older than their years”; one time it 
even went so far as to claima 14-year-old child was “flaunting her womanly 
curves” 
<http://mediafailsite.blogspot.co.uk/2012/11/daily-mail-perving-on-14-year-old-elle-fanning-fail.html#.ULIR6IXN9O0>
, which was nice. Quite how this squares with the Mail’s notorious paranoia 
about paedophiles lurking around every corner is not something we need to waste 
too much time pondering.

Lily-Rose youth makes her superior to her mother, even though she has yet to 
release a song on a par with Joe le Taxi

The fashion industry indulges a little in this kind of thing, too, but without 
the corresponding anxiety about paedophilia. No, fashion can’t waste time 
worrying about that, not when it’s too busy cooing over models so thin they 
look like underfed pubescents, and sacking once-successful models because 
they’re now older than 26. For all the occasional lip service some fashion 
brands pay to older women,such as hiring Joan Didion, say, to help them flog 
sunglasses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/12/celine-joan-didion-literary-hero-fashion-advertisement>
, the fact is that the fashion industry still labours under the notion that any 
young woman of 16 is fair game to ogle and judge, and that it is the firm dream 
of everyone over the age of – ugh! – 30 to look 21 at most, untouched by such 
repulsive things as experience and childbearing. This attitude was encapsulated 
in one online newspaper’s frankly creepy story (and I use that word loosely) 
that ran last week with the headlineCelebrity Mothers and Daughters Who Could 
Pass for Sisters 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/fashion/people/celebrity-mothers-and-daughters-who-could-pass-for-sisters/>
. I’m not sure which part of this stupid story I found more nauseating: the 
insinuation that the newspaper was paying a compliment to the mothers by saying 
they resemble their daughters’ sisters, or the suggestion that the rest of us 
should aspire to this Jeremy Kyle Show-level of familial confusion. Anyway, 
number one on this list was one Lily-Rose Depp and her mother, Vanessa Paradis.

Depp was always going to be a subject of interest for the fashion press, 
simply because she has very attractive parents and a pretty name. Now that she 
is 16 it is officially open season on her: she made her debut as a model for 
Chanel this month and,as one fashion magazine put it 
<http://www.glamourmagazine.co.uk/news/celebrity/2015/04/who-is-lily-rose-melody-depp-facts-and-profile>
, , she “is all grown up – well, grown up at least to impress the fashion pack 
at Chanel’s show”.

It’s easy to see what’s going on here. Even though Lily-Rose bears a 
remarkable resemblance to her mother, she is a mere 16 to her mother’s 42, and 
ergo inherently superior, even though she has yet to release a song on a par 
with Be My Baby, never mind Joe le Taxi. A similar sort of thing is currently 
going on with Cindy Crawford’s daughter Kaia Gerber, who at 13 – 13! – already 
has a modelling contract.

Fashion, by its very nature, is always obsessed with the new – the new dress 
length, the new jacket style, the new £2,000 handbag. This is how it maintains 
its engine, which is a fancy way of saying it’s how it makes money. It’s also a 
way of trying to stay “relevant”, one of the fashion industry’s ultimate 
buzzwords. The cover of Vogue this month illustrates the hilarity of this 
endeavour with its instruction to readers to “Buzzfeed your look”.Upon being 
contacted by London’s Evening Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/londoners-diary/londoners-diary-garrick-resists-calls-to-step-into-the-21st-century-10371948.html>
, Buzzfeed admitted to being as baffled as readers about the meaning of this 
command, although presumably not as confused as Vogue journalists. But as this 
column always prides itself on being a step ahead, I’d like to command all my 
readers to Twitter their make-up and Whatsapp their shoes.

There is a touch of that going on with celebrity daughters: their mothers have 
been around for donkeys’ years and even if they are still mind-bogglingly 
beautiful, as Cindy Crawford and Vanessa Paradis undoubtedly are – BORING! 
Bring on some new versions! But what it really encapsulates is fashion’s two 
biggest weaknesses: an obsession with youth and thinness, and a lack of 
imagination. Why bother seeking out a new, younger, thinner Vanessa Paradis 
when you can just hire her teenage daughter, right?

I personally have a deeply entrenched allergy to anybody assuming I should be 
interested in a person simply because they have a famous surname. This attitude 
has never worked out well for anyone, the public or the famous offspring alike. 
I have all the faith in the world that Lily-Rose Depp is made of sterner stuff 
than her predecessors, but does that mean anyone should be ogling photos of 
her? I think we all know the answer to that one.
