
Is this a Jeremy Clarkson moment for education? An academy chain’s director of 
education used the N-word in a meeting with senior colleagues and then laughed 
it off, its governing board has admitted. One of those present, who complained, 
then had to wait 10 months for news of any follow-up.

Philip Cantwell, director of education at the 13-school Creative Education 
Trust (CET), used the word during a meeting last June at Weavers academy, 
Wellingborough, Northamptonshire.

Martin Titchmarsh, a former headteacher working for CET as a consultant, found 
the “deeply offensive language” so “shocking” that he reported it to the 
chain’s chief executive. “I simply couldn’t let it go. It was so … wrong,” 
Titchmarsh told the Guardian.

The incident occurred, said Titchmarsh, during a discussion about an Ofsted 
inspection, in the course of which Cantwell referred to the school’s 
presentation of exam data as “the nigger in the woodpile”. “He found it 
amusing. He laughed and said: ‘I know, I know, it’s my age.’”

Titchmarsh said when he reported the incident to Marc Jordan, the chain’s 
chief executive, Jordan responded that Cantwell’s term was “unacceptable” but 
he would not say it was “racist”. The chief executive promised to keep 
Titchmarsh informed of the outcome of the complaint.

After six months, frustrated at the lack of news, Titchmarsh wrote to CET’s 
chairman, David Anderson, to raise the incident and Jordan’s handling of it. 
The trust then set up an investigatory panel.

In a letter to Titchmarsh last month, trustee Mary Groom, on behalf of the 
panel, writes: “Philip Cantwell accepts he used the phrase as described and 
that it should not be used. He has expressed deep regret that he has caused 
offence by the use of the words themselves and the nature of his response.”

The letter adds: “Once the offending words had been said … the response of 
Philip Cantwell and – once you made him aware of it – Marc Jordan, should have 
been more robust in acknowledging the racist nature of the incident and in 
taking appropriate follow-up action.”

Groom said a range of actions would be taken, including that “appropriate 
steps are taken to increase awareness of diversity issues at both trustee and 
executive level”.

Titchmarsh says: “I worked in schools as a teacher and headteacher for 37 
years and never heard any member of staff use the word. Students, parents and 
staff of CET academies will be shocked that a senior officer of an academy 
trust … could use this racist language and then believe it amusing.”

In a statement, CET said it “recognises that there is no place for racist 
language under any circumstances. We and the member of staff concerned deeply 
regret that an offensive and unacceptable racist term was used in a meeting on 
3 June 2015.

“As soon as a formal complaint was made in January this year, an internal 
investigation was carried out.”

Jordan had “reprimanded” Cantwell after Titchmarsh first raised the alarm, CET 
said.
