
Ludlow is a renowned gastro hotspot <http://www.slowfoodludlow.org.uk/>, but 
one where eating well usually carries a Michelin-star price tag. But away from 
its famous restaurants you can enjoy the town's unique local, seasonal flavour 
at a fraction of the cost.

1. Vaughan's Sandwich Bar 

There is a small seating area upstairs and a full range of sandwich fillings 
are available, but Vaughan's stands out for three very specific reasons: its 
takeaway sausage, bacon and near-legendary hot pork roast baps, the last served 
with apple sauce, crackling and stuffing. All Vaughan's meats are supplied by 
Andrew Francis (1 Market Street), one of Ludlow's three outstanding independent 
butchers, and are generously loaded into said sandwiches. If you want an 
immediate insight into what makes Ludlow so special, stop, eat, marvel at the 
meat. That, reader, is what a proper pork sausage should taste like.
• Hot sandwiches from £2.40 - £3.90. 14 King Street, Ludlow, +44 (0)1584 875453

2. The Unicorn 
 The Unicorn pub, Ludlow 
The Unicorn is not the definitive Ludlow pub. That the title must go to the 
Church Inn (pint from £2.70, the Buttercross, +44 01584 872174;
thechurchinnludlow.com <http://www.thechurchinnludlow.com>), a buzzy, 
hub-of-the-community boozer just off the main square, which carries a good 
range of well-kept real ales with an emphasis on local and regional breweries 
(Wye Valley, Hobson's, Ludlow Brewing Company). The Unicorn suffered in the 
floods of 2007 and in its subsequent refurbishment, it has undoubtedly lost 
something of its 17th-century charm. However, all these things are relative 
and, while Ludlow connoisseurs might grumble about certain details, the 
Unicorn's main bar - with its mahogany panelling, sloping floors and crooked 
beamed ceiling - remains a rural pub gem. If you are newly arrived in Ludlow 
and looking to acclimatise to the slower pace of life, head first to the 
Unicorn. Take the newspapers, nurse a pint or three (pint from £2.90, four pint 
pitcher of Ludlow Best, £11.50) in front of that crackling fire, and enjoy the 
pub's superior grub. The sausage 'n' mash - the sausages made exclusively for 
the Unicorn, the onion gravy always good - are a Ludlow rite of passage and 
other dishes, such as the Unicorn's rare breed steak burger and a "cottage" pie 
made using local Mortimer Forest game, aren't far behind. In summer, the small 
beer garden, which overlooks that troublesome River Corve, is a pleasant spot.
• Sandwiches from £4.75, mains £8.75 - £9.50. 66 Corve Street, Ludlow, +44 
(0)1584 873555;unicorn-ludlow.co.uk <http://www.unicorn-ludlow.co.uk>
Note: since this article was published The Unicorn has changed hands

3. Green Cafe 

Clive Davis's quietly fastidious cafe has quickly established itself in the 
affections of local foodies. Not only is the location a peach - the cafe is 
part of the Mill on the Green watermill centre, overlooking the River Teme and 
Dinham Weir - but Davis's sharp, seasonal cooking, short menu and sensible 
pricing have, as the cafe's entry in the 2011 Good Food Guide attests, brought 
something fresh and dynamic to Ludlow's table. The cafe serves drinks and 
ice-creams from a takeaway hatch in summer, and there are small-plate dishes 
such as soups and patés available, but it is well worth spending a couple of 
quid more on one of the main course dishes. The menu changes daily and might 
include venison pie with red cabbage and gravy, one of Clive's celebrated 
homemade pasta dishes (pretty much everything is made from scratch on site) or 
freshly grilled anchovies served with sourdough bread and a borlotti bean and 
rocket salad. NB: closed 5 Jan to 11 Feb.
• Dishes £4.50 - £9. Mill on the Green, Dinham Bridge, Ludlow, +44 (0)1584 
879872;ludlowmillonthegreen.co.uk <http://www.ludlowmillonthegreen.co.uk>

4. Castle Tea Room
 Castle Tea Rooms, Ludlow 
Ludlow Castle's best days may be behind it (the Norman fortress was abandoned 
to ruin in the late 1600s), but, as a visitor attraction, it has never looked 
better. Part of the entrance has been redeveloped as a small shopping gallery, 
with a couple of smart art and craft shops and the Castle Tea Room (CTR). A 
cluster of individual spaces, the CTR prides itself on food made from scratch 
using local and regional ingredients (Herefordshire beef, Welsh cheeses, herbs 
and flowers from its own kitchen garden). Cakes are a highlight and while a 
sample apple and cinnamon scone didn't quite live up to the website billing - 
"our scones have been said to be better than Harrods" - it was certainly crisp 
without, light and fragrant within, if a little crumbly. However, a seriously 
underpowered and far-too-hot latte was terrible, like drinking sweet, milky 
water. The CTR is a Tea Guild member and it is probably wise to stick to the 
leaves.
• Cakes and scones from £1.50, sandwiches and meals £4.50 - £7. Ludlow Castle, 
Castle Square, Ludlow, +44 (0)1584 878796;ludlowcastle-restaurant.com 
<http://www.ludlowcastle-restaurant.com>

5. Aragon's 

Aragon's was once a rather scruffy greasy spoon. Albeit one that, this being 
Ludlow, served specials like venison casserole and used local bacon and 
sausages in its breakfasts. Latterly, it has morphed into a cosy, slightly 
cluttered cafe of modest culinary ambition. The menu covers a lot of bases, 
from panini and pizzas (stone-baked and made from organic flour) through 
all-day breakfasts (full breakfast, £4.95) and hearty, homemade mains such as 
steak and ale pie, to various puddings and cakes - including Aragon's Ludlow 
Food Festival-winning honey cake. It is a good all-rounder, Aragon's, but the 
execution can be a bit gauche at times. A local sirloin steak sandwich (£6.95) 
was fine - the steak delivering on taste - but the meat was a touch overcooked 
for medium-rare, it came on a flat-tasting baguette, albeit with good and 
plentiful fried onions, and was accompanied by a side of dull chips. Wash your 
lunch down with a bottle of Wood's dark, treacly Shropshire Lad (£2.85), brewed 
to commemorate the centenary of the publication of AE Housman's poem of the 
same name. Housman, incidentally, is buried in Ludlow, just behind Aragon's, at 
St Laurence's church.
• Snacks from £1.50, panini/pizza from £3.95, full meals £5 - £8. 5 Church 
Street, +44 (0)1584 873282

6. Chang Thai 
 Chang Thai, Ludlow 
When Shaun Hill had the one-Michelin-star Merchant House in Ludlow, it was 
renowned for its precise, elegantly simple Anglo-French cooking. Like a lot of 
chefs, however, when he wasn't cooking himself, Hill loved a curry. For years, 
Ludlow's best Indian, Golden Moments (mains £6 - £8, 50 Broad Street, +44 
(0)1584 878488), proudly displayed a letter from Hill praising its use of fresh 
herbs and whole ground spices. Of Chang Thai, meanwhile, Hill has said it is 
"one of the places I still miss on the Ludlow food scene". Housed in a former 
back-street pub, it is split across a narrow alleyway between a lounge bar, the 
Globe, that serves Thai tapas (from £1.95), and the restaurant proper. The 
restaurant serves clearly authentic Thai food, which, in some cases, may take a 
little getting used to. A plate of nua nahm tok is, essentially, a zingy 
marinated Herefordshire beef salad, full of fresh mint, coriander and chilli in 
a sweet, vinegary dressing, served with good glutinous rice. The addition of 
ground roasted rice, however - yes, raw rice, oven-roasted - lends a grittiness 
that is a bit of an acquired texture. Chang Thai also own the new spic 'n' span 
Ludlow takeaway Thai Box (4 Upper Galderford, +44 (0)1584 879474;
thaiboxtakeaway.co.uk <http://www.thaiboxtakeaway.co.uk>)
• Mains from £7.95, two-course set lunch £10.95. 3 Market Street, Ludlow, +44 
(0)1584 874212;thailudlow.co.uk <http://www.thailudlow.co.uk>

7. The Clive 

This swish restaurant-with-rooms just outside Ludlow is also a popular casual 
dining spot, which you can reach by walking across open fields, via Ludlow 
racecourse. The main building includes a plainly modernised cafe-bar and a more 
traditional exposed-stone lounge, with log fire and sofas, as well as a 
courtyard for summer. There, you can chow on a short bar menu of fresh soups, 
sandwiches and fish 'n' chips (£10.95). The emphasis, naturally, is on regional 
ingredients (beef from nearby Woofferton, proper cheddar from Weobley in 
Herefordshire) and you'll findHobson's 
<http://www.aleontap.co.uk/hobsons-brewery.html> and Ludlow Brewing 
<http://www.aleontap.co.uk/ludlow-brewery.html> Co. beers at the bar. 
Personally, I would rather you shopped in Ludlow town centre itself, where good 
food is a living, breathing and at times dirty and bloody everyday experience, 
but next door to the Clive, you will find Ludlow Food Centre (
ludlowfoodcentre.co.uk <http://www.ludlowfoodcentre.co.uk>), a visitor 
attraction and posh food hall.
• Cakes £1.75, sandwiches £5.50 - £7. A49, Bromfield, Ludlow, +44 (0)1584 
856565;theclive.co.uk <http://www.theclive.co.uk>

8. Van Doesburg's 
 Van Doesburg's delicatessen, Ludlow 
A short hop from Ludlow (25 minutes by car, 15 by train), in what, due to its 
verdant peaks and valleys, was once called Little Switzerland, you will find 
quaint, sleepy Church Stretton. It is home to one of the best delicatessens in 
Britain. A "gourmet food store" that, for once, justifies such billing, Ed and 
Jane van Doesburg's deli is the sort of place that, every time you visit, 
quietly knocks you sideways. The prices too, while not ridiculous exactly, are 
certainly a fraction of what you would pay for food of this provenance, 
freshness, generosity and skill, in any major city. Van Doesburg's is a hive of 
making 'n' baking activity and the cakes and traybakes (85p-£1.95) are 
incredible. A recent sample slice of cranberry and blueberry frangipane was of 
a perfect density and sweetness and encased in remarkably thin, crisp pastry. 
Many supposedly good restaurants would struggle to produce a dessert of that 
quality. Likewise, the sandwiches, interesting salads (95p for 100g), tartlets, 
vegetarian pizza slices and fresh soups all sing. An exceptional place.
• Sandwiches from £2.50, pizza slices £2.30. 3 High Street, Church Stretton, 
+44 (0)1694 722867;vandoesburgs.co.uk <http://www.vandoesburgs.co.uk>

9. Berry's Coffee House 

Almost next door to Van Doesburg's - stock-up there, eat lunch here, maybe - 
you'll find Berry's, a tiny, narrow house that, aesthetically, retains much of 
its Victorian charm. Luckily, the food is more up to date. Indeed, you will 
rarely find a place that pays such heed to contemporary "local, seasonal" 
mores. A separate sheet on the menu lists regional suppliers, fromAlternative 
Meats <http://www.alternativemeats.co.uk/> in Wem to the Roman Vineyard 
<http://www.wroxetervineyard.co.uk/> in Wroxeter. Such diligent sourcing shines 
through in the top-notch food, which ranges from breakfasts and reliable 
favourites such as Welsh rarebit (made with Wood's Shropshire Lad ale) to daily 
specials such as half a local pheasant, pot roasted in that Wroxeter white wine 
with mash and vegetables (£9.25). The only downside, on this visit, was the 
coffee, ironically. For a coffee house it was only so-so - satisfyingly strong 
but a little one-note in its flavour. Walk off your lunch by heading up the 
steep slope to the top of the nearby Long Mynd hill.
• Breakfast £1.50 - £7.80, sandwiches/ snacks from £3.40, meals £5 - £9. 17 
High Street, Church Stretton, +44 (0)1694 724452;berryscoffeehouse.co.uk 
<http://www.berryscoffeehouse.co.uk>

10. Takeaway snacks & food shopping

Despite what you may have heard, Ludlow does have supermarkets. You will find 
Aldi and Tesco just off Corve Street. Very useful they are too, for stocking up 
on basics like bleach and bog roll. For food, however, head to the town centre 
and its unusually vibrant cluster of independent shops. Whether you're staying 
in self-catering accommodation locally, or just looking to pick up a few bits 
for a picnic lunch, one of the great joys of visiting Ludlow is the ability to 
whiz around the main square and, in 10 minutes, put together a fantastic 
spread, relatively cheaply.
 Ludlow pies at Price's bakers 
Start by buying some freshly squeezed orange (£1.65/ £2.95-a-bottle) or Teme 
Valley juices atFarmer's veg market (Farmers, 1 Mill Street, +44 (0)1584 
873532), then head toPrice's family bakery for excellent artisan breads, as 
well as cakes, sandwiches and Reg May's sausage rolls (7 Castle Street, +44 
(0)1584 872815;pricesthebakers.co.uk <http://www.pricesthebakers.co.uk>). The 
sensationalMousetrap Cheese Shop (6 Church Street, +44 (0)1584 879556; 
mousetrapcheese.streamlinenettrial.co.uk 
<http://www.mousetrapcheese.streamlinenettrial.co.uk>) will happily cut you a 
small slice for your lunch. Try their own Little Hereford, a creamy, slightly 
nutty hard cheese, similar to a traditional cheddar, made at their dairy near 
Leominster. Just opposite,Deli on the Square, (4 Church Street, +44 (0)1584 
877353;delionthesquare.co.uk <http://www.delionthesquare.co.uk>) sells good 
locally made quiches and pies, including that regional speciality "fidget pie" 
– cooked gammon and layered potato flavoured with apple, sage and cider (£3.10).
DW Wall's (14 High Street, +44 (0)1584 872060, wallsbutchers.co.uk 
<http://www.wallsbutchers.co.uk/>), for me, Ludlow's best butcher, also carries 
a small range of pork and other pies (from £1.08) and, a minute's walk away,
Pure Spirit Drinks (2 Old Street, +44 (0)1584 878999; purespiritdrinks.co.uk 
<http://www.purespiritdrinks.co.uk>) sells an exemplarily selection of real 
ales and regional ciders. Alternatively, if you head down Corve Street you can 
buy a bottle of Ludlow Gold (£2, six-for-£10) ) direct from the brewery itself 
(theLudlow Brewing Company, Kingsley Garage, 105 Corve Street, +44 (0)1584 
873291;theludlowbrewingcompany.co.uk <http://www.theludlowbrewingcompany.co.uk>
). On the way, you will pass the self-explanatoryMyriad Organics (22 Corve 
Street, +44 (0)1584 872665), which, as well as selling everything from Green & 
Blacks ice-cream to alfalfa sprouts, also rustles up a daily hot soup (£2).

• Tony Naylor travelled from Manchester to Ludlow with Arriva Trains Wales (
arrivatrainswales.co.uk <http://www.arrivatrainswales.co.uk>)
