
Baroness, the metal band I’d cofounded in Savannah, Georgia, had been going 
for 10 years the night we played Bristol’s Fleece & Firkin in 2012. It was a 
great gig, and we stayed up until the early hours sharing stories with fans, 
finally falling into the bunks on our tour bus to drive to a show in 
Southampton.

I was one of the first to wake the next day. I used to spend each morning on 
tour writing a recap of the previous night’s show, and I was typing at a table 
halfway down the bus when we turned on to a narrow road at the top of a steep 
hill with a sign reading “12% gradient”.

I felt a jolt of fear as I heard the sounds of mechanical failure: a hiss, a 
creak and rending metal. Our driver, Norman, was from Berlin and I knew he 
wasn’t fond of driving in the UK. I called to him and when he looked at me the 
terror in his eyes was unmistakable: it was clear the brakes had failed. Bends 
kept obscuring the road ahead, and there were high stone walls on both sides. 
Norman managed to steer past two oncoming cars, missing them by a whisker, but 
our speed was increasing every second. It was only a matter of time before we 
crashed.

The walls gave way to open countryside, and I thought about jimmying the door 
open and trying to leap to safety, but the idea seemed selfish and ridiculous. 
I started screaming to alert everyone. Those who were awake were in a lounge at 
the back of the bus and unaware of what was going on; everyone else was still 
asleep. Confused faces popped out of bunks as, ahead of us, the end of the road 
came into view – an intersection with a guardrail facing us head-on. I shouted 
to Norman, “Can we make the turn?” He shook his head.

The bus hit the rail at 65mph and sailed right through. For a moment or two, 
we were airborne. The tops of pine trees whipped past the windscreen and there 
was a strange sense of calm. My eyes met Norman’s and, wordlessly, we said 
goodbye. I thought, “I’ve had a good run and if this is the way I go, bring it 
on. Just please make it quick.”

The bus hit dirt and gravel and I shot forward like a bullet, hitting the 
windscreen headfirst. I remember seeing a spiderweb of cracks bursting out from 
the point of impact, and the windscreen popped clean out. As the dust settled, 
I found myself sitting in the empty frame.

Related: Baroness: Purple review – metallers lunge for mainstream glory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/03/baroness-purple-review-metallers-lunge-for-mainstream-glory>

I surveyed my body for damage – my left leg was strangely bent, my left arm 
shattered and twisted behind my back, so that my hand rested on my right hip. I 
grabbed my wrist and tried to straighten my arm, yanking it up. I could feel 
nothing – it was like holding the cold hand of a stranger.

Band and crew came crawling out of the wreckage, bruised and bloody. There 
were nine people on the bus and, astonishingly, it gradually became clear there 
had been no fatalities. Witnesses arrived almost immediately – the bus had come 
to rest near a restaurant on a canal. As I was helped from the wreckage, I saw 
we’d driven off a viaduct, 30ft high. The bus lay across a stream, the front 
crumpled like a beer can, the back cradled by the trees that had helped soften 
our descent.

The pain was phenomenal, but even as I pleaded with people to knock me out, I 
felt an overwhelming joy at being alive. There would be dark times ahead – for 
a few days, it looked like I might lose my arm. In the end, it was rebuilt 
during an eight-hour operation. I spent two weeks immobilised in an acute 
orthopaedic trauma ward, then another three in a flat in Bath with my wife and 
daughter, long after my band mates had returned to the US.

Related: Experience: I was out at sea when a tsunami struck 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/22/experience-out-at-sea-tsunami-struck-thailand>

Three years on, I’m still in constant pain and can’t climb out of a chair the 
way I used to, but as soon as I could wiggle my fingers again I phoned 
Baroness’s guitarist, Pete, and said, “We have to keep the band going.” Since 
then, we’ve recorded a new album, largely inspired by the crash, and we’re back 
on tour. Allen, our drummer, and bass player Matt both suffered fractured 
vertebrae and decided not to continue, but we stay in touch. We all have a 
unique bond – bound by aches and pains, but also by the love developed after 
coming through it together.

• As told to Chris Broughton.

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>.
