
An academy chain set up by the schools minister Lord Nash 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/11/academies-minister-lord-nash-breaching-governance-guidelines>
 is allowing his unqualified and unpaid daughter to teach history and help draw 
up a new curriculum, prompting concerns from parents and a teachers’ union.

Future Academies <http://www.futureacademies.org/> in Pimlico, central London, 
was set up by the minister in charge of academies and his wife, Caroline. They 
both maintain prominent roles in the organisation.

Since September, their daughter Jo Nash has taught four classes between the 
ages of 10 and 16. She is also advising on a new curriculum to teach history 
and is involved in the recruitment of staff.


Related: Academy trust lauded by Cameron falls apart as executive head quits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/10/perry-beeches-academy-trust-lauded-by-cameron-falls-apart-executive-head-quits>

The role of Jo Nash, 32, who has no teaching qualifications but does have a 
degree in history, has been questioned by teachers and staff.

Since 2012, academy schools have been able to hire unqualified teachers, 
angering many in the profession. Until then, they could only employ people with 
qualified teacher status.

Two parents made complaints about Jo Nash, but a lawyer speaking on behalf of 
Lord Nash, his daughter and the academy said these were minor, that the overall 
response had been positive and that she was not paid for her services.

 But some teachers have questioned why she has been given a teaching role. 
They say her role reinforces the impression that the Nash family is treating 
the four-school chain as a private fiefdom.

Michael Parker, the Westminster branch secretary of the National Union of 
Teachers, said he was baffled by Jo Nash’s role at the school.


Related: Government drops plan to make all schools in England academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>

“I find it extraordinary that an unpaid, untrained and unqualified volunteer 
is being allowed to teach children. This is an example of what parents need to 
be prepared for if the deregulation of education continues.

“Teachers and parents need to be able to trust the system of governance at 
FutureAcademies <http://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> to oversee an 
untrained and unqualified teacher. It is difficult to maintain faith when the 
academy trust was set up by an unqualified teacher’s parents and her father is 
the minister for schools,” he said.


A spokesperson for Future, two of whose four schools have been judged as 
outstanding by Ofsted, said: “All of our teachers either have qualified teacher 
status or have a degree relevant to the subject they teach.”

Lord Nash set up Future in 2006 and was a generous Conservative donor before 
being given a peerage in 2013 and made the minister in charge of academisation.

He is the director of Future Academies, a governor and co-chair of Pimlico 
Academy, which is part of the chain, and a trustee of Future, the funding 
charity behind the chain.

Lady Nash, a former stockbroker, is also a trustee of Future, co-chair of 
governors of Pimlico Academy, and chair of governors at two primary schools in 
the chain.

The academy chain includes three primary schools and a senior school in a 
multicultural, inner-city area a mile from the Houses of Parliament.

Jo Nash, born Josephine Nash, was educated at Downe House, an independent 
school in Berkshire whose alumni include the comedian Miranda Hart and TV 
presenter Claire Balding. She went on to read modern history at Oxford.

Before moving on to teaching, she worked in the office of the former work and 
pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith for at least three years andis still 
registered as a member of his staff on a parliamentary register 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmsecret/staff-04.htm>.

In September, Jo Nash joined Future as an unqualified teacher and as an 
adviser to help design the history curriculum and recruit teachers. She is the 
only unpaid adviser at the chain.

In a document circulated among prospective teachers, Jo Nash wrote that her 
love for teaching has had to overcome her own negative preconceptions around 
the profession.

 “I assumed it would be badly paid, that I would have to spend ages learning 
pedagogical theory to even become qualified to teach, and that I would be 
unlikely to be working with like-minded people. I chose a different career path 
instead.

“Eventually, 10 years later, I was given the opportunity to teach. In addition 
to developing our knowledge-rich curriculum at Future Academies, I teach two 
classes of year 6 pupils at primary level and one class of year 7 students and 
one class of GCSE students at secondary level. I’ve chosen not to become a 
qualified teacher because I honestly believe that high energy and a great love 
of your subject are the most important qualifications,” she wrote.

Future Academies is now recruiting Latin and ancient history teachers 
<http://www.theclassicslibrary.com/jobs-classics-teaching-positions-future-academies-westminster/>
 – and Jo Nash is given as the main contact for applicants.

This is not the first time the academy chain has been caught up in controversy 
over the use of staff without formal teaching qualifications 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/oct/09/free-school-head-no-teaching-qualifications-leaves-job>
.

In October 2013, Annaliese Briggs, a 27-year-old headteacher who had no 
teaching qualifications, left her job at Pimlico primary after just three weeks.

Last month, parents and teachers forced the chain’s managers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/26/future-academies-lord-nash-longer-school-day-schools-minister>
 to drop proposals to extend the day for children as young as five by 45 
minutes.

Jonathan Coad, from the law firm Lewis Silkin, responded to questions on 
behalf of Lord Nash, Jo Nash and Future Academies. He said Jo Nash was Future 
Academies’ only unpaid volunteer, that she was entirely funded by her parents 
and has been “a huge success”.

“The reaction of parents, staff and pupils to Jo Nash has been overwhelmingly 
positive. Amongst all of those compliments there has been only two mildly 
negative comments – one from a parent who nonetheless insisted that their child 
loved the class taught by Ms Nash,” he said.

“Future Academies is an educational charity whose goal is providing a top 
quality education; creating opportunities to make the most of children’s 
abilities and supporting them to do their very best at school. Our work 
includes curriculum design and development, and training teachers in 
partnership with the Institute of Education ... [Jo Nash] has been a huge hit 
with both pupils and staff.”

• This article was amended on 13 May 2016. An earlier version misplaced Down 
House school in Richmond, Surrey, and described it as “£8,000-a-term”. To 
clarify: termly fees for day pupils are £8,190 but most pupils at the school 
are boarders, for whom fees are £11,320.
