
The leader of Britain’s biggest union has expressed concern at the lack of 
women in top jobs inJeremy Corbyn’s shadow cabinet 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-shadow-cabinet-in-full>
 but appealed for the Labour leader to be given “at least a week” in the job to 
prove himself.

In nuanced comments, Len McCluskey 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey>, the head of Unite, told 
the Guardian “it might be a mistake” by Corbyn to have given the main jobs to 
John McDonnell (shadow chancellor), Hilary Benn (shadow foreign secretary) and 
Andy Burnham (shadow home secretary).

He said: “I was slightly concerned that a woman was not in the top jobs, and I 
don’t mind saying that, it surprised me. I think it might be a mistake, 
although putting Angela [Eagle] in as first secretary maybe has balanced that.”

McCluskey distanced himself from a report in the Times saying that he was 
unhappy with Corbyn’s performance over the first 48 hours as leader of the 
party.

“I think there is more than 50% of women in the cabinet, it is an interesting 
cabinet, but it is not true to say that I am unhappy,” he said. “Give the man 
at least a week.”

Eagle was initially appointed as shadow business secretary in an email sent to 
the media by Labour headquarters at 10.35pm on Sunday. A second email 
announcing herextra title as first shadow secretary of state 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/labour-shadow-cabinet-angela-eagle-extra-title-women-row>
 – a title once held in government by Peter Mandelson – was sent at 12.19am on 
Monday.

McCluskey, speaking at the TUC annual congress in Brighton on Tuesday, said he 
was becoming increasingly concerned at claims that David Cameron was trying 
negotiate away workers’ rights with Europe, and refused to be drawn on whether
Unite <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite> might ever campaign to leave 
the EU.

“We will be looking very closely at the timing of the referendum and at what 
the prime minister is trying to do,” he said. “If needs be we will consider 
calling a one-day policy conference to specifically discuss the European issue.”

Corbyn is expected to receive an enthusiastic reception when he makes his 
first substantive policy speech to TUC delegates on Tuesday afternoon. Earlier 
in the day, he attended a service at St Paul’s Cathedral to commemorate the 
75th anniversary of the Battle of Britain.

Behind the scenes, Corbyn is being urged to set up a functioning leader’s 
office quickly to give his administration momentum and clarity. Few key 
appointments have been made, even though it has been odds-on for weeks that he 
was to be elected. Some union leaders were displeased by the appointment of 
McDonnell as shadow chancellor, and Corbyn was pressed by MPs at the weekly 
meeting of the parliamentary party on Monday evening to clarify his policy 
positions.

In his TUC speech, Corbyn is expected to warn Cameron not to cut welfare for 
Britain’s poorest, as MPs prepare to vote on Treasury-imposed tax credit cuts 
on Tuesday evening. He will also set out his opposition to the government trade 
union laws including higher strike ballot thresholds.

Corbyn may warn the prime minister not to water down workers’ rights as part 
of his renegotiation of Britain’s relationship with the EU. The unions are 
expected to pass a motion on Tuesday that would allow them to advocate 
withdrawal from the EU if they regarded the deal struck by Cameron as 
undermining labour rights.

Frank Field, the Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP and 
chair of the work and pension select committee, claimed that the chancellor, 
George Osborne, might even be defeated on welfare cuts in the Commons, saying 
Tory MPs were “massively concerned” by the working tax credit cuts as they will 
hit “strivers”.

He predicted uproar on the Tory benches when the tax credit cuts are 
introduced in April, because “decent people who work hard doing grotty jobs” 
will be turning up to their surgeries to complain they have been let down by 
the party.

On BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Tuesday, Field said that in the runup to 
the election “the chancellor said the Tory party were the party of strivers and 
Labour was the party of welfare”.

He said Osborne had spent Monday talking to anxious Tory MPs urging them not 
to defeat him in the vote on Tuesday evening, since they believed they 
represented low-paid workers. “They believe the rhetoric that they are looking 
after the strivers,” Field said.

Labour is now largely united on opposing all the welfare cuts after divisions 
in the summer, when the shadow cabinet split over Harriet Harman’s decision to 
back some of Osborne’s reforms, including cutting tax credits for a third 
child. But Corbyn will be pressed to clarify Labour’s position on the EU after 
frontbenchers expressed different views on whether the party would support 
continued UK membership in the referendum.

Benn said on Monday that Labour would support British membership of the EU in 
all circumstances, but Eagle has left open the possibility of support for 
withdrawal.

Field said he was struck how fast the debate on the free movement of labour 
was shifting inside the EU. He said border controls were now at the centre of 
politics, and this needed to be a red line for Cameron in his talks with EU.
