
When I was growing up, my father said I should keep a diary on me at all times 
with my name and address inside. “People won’t believe you live here 
otherwise,” he said. So inside, under my name, I carefully wrote: “Address: 
Arnos Vale Cemetery, Bristol.”

Arnos Vale is a 45-acre Victorian cemetery, created in 1837. It was quite 
something when it was built, with sweeping green lawns and white classical 
buildings. My grandfather William Utting arrived from Walsall in 1908 to be its 
superintendent. Thanks to him, Arnos Vale was the first cemetery outside London 
to do cremations. Later, his son Alfred, my father, took over. I was born in 
1943, the third generation to live at the cemetery. I stayed there for 30 years.

It was a busy place with more than 30 staff; it was spotless, with rose bushes 
and finely clipped lawns. My father supervised the funeral services and there 
were gravediggers, grasscutters and a shire horse. Both sets of my grandparents 
lived there, too.

But it was an adult world. My sister Elaine didn’t come along till I was 10. I 
spent a lot of time on my own playing in the cemetery on my bike. I’d look for 
conkers. Sometimes I’d visit the gravediggers in their cabin. They’d share 
their cheese and onion sandwiches with me. They were nice men; one of them read 
Nietzsche.

It wasn’t a frightening place to live. If anything, it was full of kindness 
and respect. You can’t grow up in a cemetery and not want to be kind. I’ve seen 
grief since I was little; I’ve got a sixth sense for when people are suffering. 
I hate cruelty, and I’m slightly nonconformist, unsurprisingly. My father was a 
good man, very reassuring, but sometimes his job got to him. If he’d been at a 
difficult funeral, I’d see him slip a bit of whisky into a cup of tea.

He wasn’t keen on me taking over. “You’ve had enough of death,” he said. So I 
worked as a railway signalman, then as a postman. But I still came home to the 
cemetery all through my 20s. My parents didn’t charge me rent and I could play 
my records as loudly as I liked: why would I leave?

It was my job to make sure the cemetery was empty before locking the gates. If 
I found an amorous couple, I’d pop up from behind a gravestone with a torch 
held under my face as a prank. Only once or twice, mind.

Not everyone shared my sense of adventure. Once, I invited a girl home to 
listen to music. We were walking together and she asked where we were going. 
I pointed over the cemetery walls and said: “In there.” She ran off and never 
came back.

I met Margaret at a party. When I told her I lived in the cemetery, she walked 
off unimpressed, thinking I was pulling her leg. I ran after her and showed her 
my diary with my address inside. That convinced her. We fell in love, I moved 
out and we got married. Now we have two grown-up sons and a five-year-old 
granddaughter. We left Bristol six years ago and live in Wales.

Related: Experience: I was born with no ears 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/23/experience-i-was-born-with-no-ears>

Towards the end of my father’s career, the cemetery suffered. It wasn’t 
invested in properly, it changed hands too many times and it became neglected. 
By the 1980s, it was in a bad way, covered with brambles and trees that damaged 
the graves and made access difficult. Happily, it was rescued by a charity, 
which undertook a major restoration. Now it’s a place of rest, a place to walk 
the dog; it’s an oasis in a busy city, and still a working cemetery. The trees 
and brambles remain, but there are also masses of primroses, owls, wildlife. 
There’s a sense of renewal.

After I retired, I started volunteering here. I come from Wales every Friday 
to do my bit. I sit in the main office, below the room where my father was 
born, and welcome people and answer phones. Friends drop in. Sometimes I take 
schoolchildren around and show them where I used to play. I haven’t yet planned 
where I’ll end up after I die. But seeing as my sister’s ashes are here, next 
to my grandparents, I expect there’ll always be a bit of me here, too.

• As told to Nicola Skinner
