
We want Worcestershire to be a place where people are prosperous, healthy and 
safe and supported by excellent services.

We are recruiting to critical roles in our adult social care team as part of a 
whole service restructure and you would be joining us at an exciting and 
critical point in our journey of change post the Care Act. Our new structures 
for the provision of community social work and for supporting those in need of 
urgent care services reflect our commitment to work with NHS, voluntary and 
community services partners in delivering responsive and focused services, 
which promote independence and wellbeing, to enable people to be in control of 
their own lives.


Tell us about Worcestershire

Worcestershire is an amazing place to live, work and visit, with a diverse 
population centred around urban areas surrounded by beautiful countryside. We 
are home to exciting businesses with particular strengths in cyber security, 
advanced manufacturing and agri-tech and we also have an ambitious and growing 
university. We’ve had the third fastest growing economy nationally in recent 
years and are working closely with businesses and our partners to make “World 
Class Worcestershire” a reality. It’s an affluent county, but there are also 
pockets of deprivation: some areas of Worcestershire are among the 10% most 
deprived nationally.


What are the job opportunities at Worcestershire county council?

We are recruiting to:
Urgent care lead
Operations and integration lead (north and south)
Urgent care manager (hospitals)
Urgent care manager (rapid response)
Locality managers


What is it like working in adult social care at Worcestershire county council ?

New systems and processes have been designed to reduce bureaucracy and to 
enable employees to focus on timely and effective frontline practice. We have 
high ambitions for the services we provide to citizens in Worcestershire and 
know that effective social work leadership is critical to achieving these 
ambitions. We are looking for ambitious, creative and inspiring individuals to 
join us at a critical point in our redesign journey. Whether you are looking 
for a first frontline management position or for the opportunity to move in to 
a senior role, you would benefit from Worcestershire county council’s 
comprehensive leadership development programme. We also provide a flexible and 
mobile environment as a key part of the council’s smarter working 
transformation which means we are more responsive and innovative for our 
citizens with sophisticated technology which allows you to work from almost 
anywhere, therefore offering best value for our community.

What are the council’s plans for improving services?

We are one of the largest and most progressive employers in the region, with 
more than 13,500 employees (including school based staff) and an annual 
turnover in excess of £770m. We serve more than 500,000 citizens living in 
Worcestershire, providing a huge range of services. We are a pioneering, 
industrious and influential organisation. Courageous leadership has enabled us 
to make savings of almost £98m in the last four years. The pressure to cut 
costs has prompted vast and creative organisational change, allowing us to 
streamline processes and systems and cut costs, but with a clear focus on 
achieving better outcomes for residents, businesses and communities. Engagement 
and communication with all stakeholders has been absolutely vital. More than 
35,000 local people have had their say and informed the development of our four 
priorities, so that budgets can be focused on what local people have said is 
important to them.


We are looking for people that can fit into our people strategy

Putting customer need at the heart of everything we do
Provide high quality services which meet the express needs of the community by:


 * Prioritising customer need. 
 * Treating customers with respect and courtesy. 
 * Consulting customers in the development of services and seeking feedback on 
the quality and level of service delivery. 
 * Analysing complaints and developing improvement plans. 
 * Act on commitments to customers. 
Being proactive to achieve excellence
Finding solutions and creative ways of working not blocked by bureaucracy by:


 * Making things happen. 
 * Being innovative and seeking solutions beyond traditional approaches. 
 * Taking managed risks and supporting colleagues to take managed risks. 
 * Using positive language to identify what will happen, rather than that 
which will not. 
 * Acting on others’ long term interests. 
Courage to make constructive change
Cohesive decision making, ensuring services are responsive to needs by:


 * Taking ownership. 
 * Enabling people to have as much freedom as possible in determining change. 
 * Constructively challenging boundaries where they cause blockages. 
 * Developing professional competence to improve efficiency and effectiveness. 
 * Supporting colleagues to achieve excellence. 
Find out more about the vacancies and apply for the roles in adult social care 
<http://www.worldclasscareers.co.uk/worldclasscareers/info/4/adult_social_care>.


Content on this page is produced and paid for by Worcestershire council 



