
It may seem odd to say so these days, but I rather like the idea of a large 
bit of land being in the same hands for several hundred years - especially when 
it is being put to some unusual productive uses. The Boscawen family have been 
sitting pretty in Cornwall since 1335, and their estate, Tregothnan, comprises 
some 20,000 acres of field, woodland and garden - 40 hectares of garden, as it 
happens, as magnificent as Kew, almost as significant in botanical circles, and 
completely private. They don't farm the whole lot themselves, yet the business 
has to make money or it would cease to exist, and it's that need that has taken 
them into some curious areas.

I'll pass over the joinery business, where a team of five saw, chisel and bang 
together bespoke windows, gates and the like, and the sustainable charcoal, and 
the two beekeepers and the new wood-fired smoke house that heats the estate 
offices. Apart from the honey, there's not much to eat in that lot.

No, it's the tea that got me excited. Last year I went to the tea-growing area 
of Sri Lanka, and thought it remarkable, hillside after hillside lined with 
bushy specimens of Camellia sinensis, jade-green and glossy. They looked very 
pretty, although I was put off on learning that they were also home to leeches 
and poisonous Russell's vipers.

There are no such booby traps in Tregothnan, although it isn't without its 
hazards. "A gale blew away our first bushes," says Jonathon Jones, the garden 
director, an unnervingly young man with a boundless enthusiasm for the business 
of growing things. And then there are the pheasants: gourmet pheasants have 
taken a liking to the silver-tipped leaves of the bushes growing in the walled 
garden below the big house. And that's not a hazard they face in Darjeeling or 
Kandy.

You may ask why no one has thought of growing tea in Britain before - after 
all, as Jones points out, the climate in Cornwall isn't that dissimilar to that 
of Darjeeling or Kandy: cool and wet, just what tea needs to flourish. Perhaps 
someone has, but Tregothnan is the first place to grow and market the stuff 
seriously. In fact, Tregothnan is ideally suited to camellia, and the garden 
has long been famous for its collection of decorative varieties, an early 
expression of the Boscawen family's passion for botany.

Wind and pheasants notwithstanding, Jones and his team have pressed on 
undeterred. They began by importing varieties from China and Japan. When word 
got out into the tea-growing community, several old planters, who had retired 
to Britain with their favourite varieties to keep them going, descended on 
Tregothnan and handed over their treasured bushes. Now they have 30 Assam and 
Chinese varieties growing over 20 acres. As Jones started all this in only 
2002, these are still early days, and he is constantly trialling new varieties. 
"We are aiming for a high-quality, low-volume business," he says.

Consequently, they follow the time-honoured system of hand-plucking the 
bushes. The leaves are then rolled to bruise them, chopped, oxidised and 
slow-dried before being blended into Classic Tea, Afternoon Tea, Earl Grey and 
Green Tea (to go with Tregothnan Cornish Clotted Cream Biscuits, perhaps, and 
Tregothnan Kea Plum Jam or Tregothnan Honey). Having caught the tea bug, Jones 
is now branching out into herbal teas as well, with manuka, camomile, pineapple 
mint, peppermint, chocolate mint, nettle, dill and fennel, all made from herbs 
grown on the premises. That's the advantage, I suppose, of having a large 
garden at your disposal.

In an expansive moment, GK Chesterton once wrote, "Tea is a gentleman, cocoa 
is a cad." Tea doesn't get much more gentlemanly than that from Tregothnan 
Estate.

Where to get it

Tregothnan Estate Truro, Cornwall, 01872 520 000, tregothnan.co.uk 
<http://www.tregothnan.co.uk>
Tregothnan teas are available from the estate shop, various local retailers,
Harvey Nichols and Fortnum & Mason
