
When the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> was created in 1948, an 
information leaflet said “everyone – rich or poor, man, woman or child – can 
use it or any part of it”.

In my first year as a doctor I learned just how important that principle is. 
During that time, I went through an emotional rollercoaster. I remember one 
patient trying to break my arm on a Saturday afternoon because he thought we 
were holding him in hospital to kill him, and in that same shift I shared a hug 
with an old lady who just wanted some comfort. To be honest, I think that hug 
comforted me just as much, if not more, than it did her. Being a first-year 
doctor is incredibly hard, and equally rewarding; looking back on it now, there 
were two patients who showed me how important free healthcare is.

I worked in a small hospital in a former mining community – the kind of 
down-to-earth place where there’s often not much money to spare. Before the 
NHS, falling seriously ill there could have been a death sentence, because 
there just wasn’t any money to pay for doctors, nurses or hospital beds. These 
two patients were born into a place and time where getting sick would have been 
a terrifying and common occurrence.

I met the first patient, a woman, during a weekend shift. I can’t remember why 
I popped in to see her – maybe she needed some blood tests, maybe I wanted to 
start some antibiotics – but when I got there, she was sat in the chair next to 
her bed in a hospital gown with her handbag on her lap. When she saw me she 
started crying. I asked what was wrong. She wasn’t crying because she was ill. 
She wasn’t crying because she didn’t know where she was. She was crying because 
she knew exactly where she was, and she was scared.

She wasn’t scared of me, or the nurses, or of being in an unfamiliar place. 
She was scared because her handbag didn’t have her purse in it, and she thought 
that if she couldn’t pay we wouldn’t look after her. In her dementia, she 
appeared to have gone back to her childhood, to a time when everything had its 
cost, and she thought hospitals were expensive and she couldn’t afford the 
treatment she was having. I reassured her, told her she didn’t need any money 
because it was free, and that we would look after her no matter what happened. 
She stopped crying, but she didn’t look totally convinced. As I left, I 
wondered how it must have been to have that fear of falling ill when she was a 
child.

The second gentleman had come in with abdominal pain and needed an operation. 
I saw him when he came into hospital, and he told me he’d been brought in by 
ambulance and so didn’t have any of his things with him. I told him not to 
worry – we could provide what he needed until his family could get to hospital 
and bring him his own clothes and washbag. He told me with tears in his eyes 
that I didn’t understand. He hadn’t brought any of his things with him, so he 
wouldn’t be able to pay me for being his doctor. When I explained to him that 
it wouldn’t be necessary, the NHS would provide his care free of charge, he 
looked at me with a huge smile and said: “Really? Thank you, doctor.”

These were both ordinary people, with ordinary lives, who needed healthcare, 
and received it free of charge. No “Do you have your credit card details, sir?” 
or “and who’s your insurance provider, madam?”

We have the best healthcare system in the world, and because of that, I could 
tell both of these lovely people that they would be looked after, cared for, 
and had nothing to worry about. As I walked away from the second patient in a 
year who was worried about not being able to pay, I gave thanks to Nye Bevan 
for his vision and drive. He said the NHS would last “as long as there are folk 
left with the faith to fight for it”. Let us fight for our wonderful, 
equalising health service.

If you would like to write a piece for Blood, sweat and tears, read our 
guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/jul/14/healthcare-workers-tell-us-about-memorable-experience>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
