
As a passionate supporter of patient engagement, I have come to value the 
significance of patient experience in improving leadership practices that 
deliver better care.


Over the last year, I have met health and social care leaders, including those 
in the community and voluntary sectors, to discuss ways to involve patients and 
communities in planning, developing and delivering sustainable, person-centred 
services. The aim of our work is to align patient and community leadership with 
clinicians and managers.

Sharing decision-making with patients and the wider local community, and 
actively seeking out, listening to and involving patients as co-producers of 
health services can lead to person-centred care.

At the NHS Confederation, we want our members to engage with local economies 
and involve patients and communities in discussions about any issue they feel 
they need to change. There is good practice from some localNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> leaders and community and patient 
leaders, but how do we connect the two together to deliver better health and 
social care?

Related: Five tips on how the NHS can engage patients and the public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/oct/29/how-nhs-engage-patients-public>

My report, Public and Patient Partnerships 
<http://www.nhsconfed.org/resources/2016/06/public-and-patient-partnerships>, 
which is being launched at the NHS Confederation conference – addresses what we 
need to look at and how to get people involved.

Patients need to empower themselves to direct their own health. We have now 
developed a framework that identifies the gaps and brings together the 
different parts of the NHS.

Widening the practice of patient engagement to include community engagement 
and involving them in discussions about treatment is critical for tackling 
long-term conditions (LTCs) which are more prevalent in economically and 
socially deprived areas.

The problem exists because we are currently using a medical model that is 
insufficient. A ten-minute GP consultation is incapable of addressing the wider 
factors underlying poor health.

But how do we get people with different health needs on board? Key factors for 
good public and patient partnership include having a theoretical model of 
health to underpin the work and understanding the basic principles and evidence 
around making effective changes.

Research suggests few people really know what effective public or patient 
involvement means, or how to implement it effectively. A broader understanding 
and implementation of patient engagement can also help to engage in an 
effective and meaningful way with those groups in society that are most 
vulnerable. At the NHS Confederation conference I will be exploring this in 
more detail and talking about my work with patients who have LTCs.

In practical terms, this means working with the community to establish 
priorities for co-designing and co-producing services that address 
community-identified priorities.

So how has this worked in practice? In Newham, east London, we worked with the 
clinical commissioning group on how to reduce type 2 diabetes using the 
principles of public and patient partnership. Type 2 diabetes was identified 
collaboratively by Newham CCG and the community as a key health issue.

Related: From god to guide: can patient-centred care become a reality in the 
NHS? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2013/may/14/patient-centred-care-reality-nhs>

A framework to help get the best outcome involved identifying a lead provider 
where 50% activity was delivered by commissioning local community partners. 
They provided exercise and other social and community services to people 
identified by the GP as being at risk of type 2 diabetes. The GP would refer 
patients onto the scheme, Newham Community Prescription (NCP), having discussed 
with patients their preferences and interests.

The evaluation showed that out of the 1,079 patients who attended the NCP, 224 
would have developed diabetes within two years. With prescribed physical 
activity, 129 patients would now not develop it. This meant a saving of 
£247,000 over two years.

Another example was Recovery Enterprises (RE), which was set up in 2012 by 
people with mental health conditions. They wanted to work with an organisation 
who would develop their ideas and help them to fulfil their ambitions. RE now 
enables businesses to focus on wellbeing.

The public and patient partnership cannot be overlooked if we are to have any 
significant impact on major health challenges both now and in the future. If we 
want more integrated leadership then we need parity of respect and involvement 
throughout the process.

 * A breakout session on realising the potential of person-centred approaches 
to health and care is taking place at the NHS Confederation’s annual conference 
on Friday 
Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
