
Dumfries House in Ayrshire has a rare collection of furniture that was 
commissioned from Chippendale specially for the house. It was going to be sold 
off, butPrince Charles <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-charles> got out 
his Rolodex, and chipped in some of his own money, to save it. He opened a 
sewing school in the attic of the house and they threw a party to open it. 
I was invited to speak, along with a couple of other Scots in fashion, 
including Christopher Kane. The night beforehand there was a small dinner and I 
found myself sitting opposite the Prince.

He has very large hands, which you notice when you shake them. When the 
starters were served I noticed he had an egg with his, which nobody else did. I 
remember being slightly jealous of it. Perhaps there’s a special signal he 
makes when he wants an egg.

He is a beautifully dressed man, always immaculate. He has access to lots of 
great stuff and can wear almost whatever he wants in the evening because he is 
head of so many of the armed forces. With his kilt he was wearing a lustrous 
deep-blue velvet Balmoral evening jacket with big flat silver buttons, about 
the size of 50p pieces, that looked hand-hammered. I’ve never seen anything 
like it.

As with all great stylists, if you put a bag over his head you could still 
tell it was him. Princes Charles has a distinctive cut and tie knot, and often 
wears a lapel pin and pocket square.

We talked mainly about the textile industry in western Scotland, although on 
other occasions I’ve chatted to him about everything from red squirrels to rare 
breed sheep. His big interest is in trying to return prosperity to areas that 
are down on their luck, and Dumfries House is in a depressed corner of 
Scotland. The textile and garment industry used to employ 800,000 people in the 
UK, now it’s down to 50,000. I don’t consider myself much of a royalist, or a 
republican, but I think a non-political head of state has a big role to play.

Charles was very charming. It was only halfway through the evening I had 
a moment where I realised: “Hang on, 10 years ago you were working as a 
technology engineer and now you are sitting opposite the future King.”

After dinner there was a Scottish singer and a piper, and we all sang along to 
the songs together. He clearly knew the whole repertoire very well. It was a 
brilliant evening.

Not that I have anything against the Queen, but the Kings of England and 
Princes of Wales were always sartorial ambassadors for the UK. While we had 
kings on the throne, from Charles II onwards, we ruled menswear. Edward VII, 
George IV, Edward VIII… These were probably the most copied menswear icons 
globally. Charles would resume that. He is the most stylish member of his 
family. Let’s not talk about Prince William’s style.

Patrick Grant is the creative director of bespoke tailors Norton & Sons of 
Savile Row
