
OK, where were we? In a private clinic, for a dating scan. Before you go in, 
there's a form to fill in on which one of the questions is "How did you get 
pregnant?" I was looking for a box marked "It was dark and I was drunk", but 
there was just a column of expensive-sounding acronyms. And while we're in the 
waiting room, a note on the scan uniform: everybody has to buy maternity wear, 
right? It's like winter tights and thermal underwear - it doesn't do a thing 
for you but you will be cold without it.

But to buy really expensive maternity wear when, realistically, you're only 
going to be wearing it for five months, and are going to look rubbish anyway is 
what marks you out as truly loaded. Also, everybody had a man with them. C was 
... I can't even remember where C was. I had done it all in such a rush that I 
forgot your first scan was meant to be a beautiful moment, where you hold 
hands. I had approached this more as an administrative vexation, like when the 
battery goes on your Honda. Pregnancy is a great leveller and all that, but 
what would go through your mind if you had misread a guidebook and ended up in 
Claridge's when you were looking for a burger? First, I am going to disgrace 
myself. And then, this is going to cripple me.

That was all displaced anyway by the actual scan. You know, as a preamble, I'm 
a lifelong defender of abortion rights. I can't bear that "look at its tiny 
fingers" talk about foetuses. But normally when you have a dating scan, it's so 
small that, depending on your nature, you either pretend you can see it or 
admit you can't, until they have pointed to it so often that you can see it. 
Then you buy a print, take it home and can't see it again. This is annoying at 
the time, but it gives you a good run to make the mental leap from seeing it as 
a parasite to seeing it as the new messiah.

Imagine that it's already 20 weeks ... that scan is enormous. That scan is the 
size of a puppy. Yeah, sure, I'm filled with the miracle of birth and all that, 
but I am mainly thinking about how incredibly embarrassing this is going to be. 
It's bad enough having to say you're pregnant, making this really sudden 
diversion on to bodily function, in a conversation with someone who, 99 times 
in a 100, you've never even discussed your piercings with.*

This is 10 times worse, because as soon as I say it, then I have to say what 
my due date is, then I have to explain why I'm only just saying it now; then 
any person of moderate curiosity will ask why I've only just realised and 
before I know it, I'm talking about my menstrual cycle to, like, my aunt, or 
the guy from NatWest.

I had forgotten, as well, about the incessant worrying. So as soon as I found 
out, immediately I was worrying about why it wasn't moving. And now it has 
started moving, it is moving so much that yesterday I thought maybe it had 
ADHD. I said that to my sister, and she said, "Maybe it's a girl." So now I'm 
worried that it's a girl. I am worried that I wasn't tired enough in the first 
trimester - not tired enough to notice, for a start - so maybe it isn't a very 
effective parasite. They are meant to totally drain you. What is it using for 
vim?

Apart from all the obvious things I was worried about having eaten and drunk, 
there are a whole load of weird things I wouldn't have eaten or drunk, armed 
with the full information. In February I had a meal that started with oysters 
and reached apotheosis in a ballantine of grey squirrel. And that was just at 
lunchtime! I can't even remember what I had for tea!

I do remember that being the day when I finished a pack of fruity Tums with a 
single Tum (I'd been hoping for two) and had a rant about why anyone would 
package indigestion tablets in odd numbers. It did not occur to me to wonder a) 
why I had indigestion b) why I'd had it so often that I'd finished a pack of 
Tums and c) why I was so angry. I just put the whole thing down to squirrel 
meat. So in retrospect, maybe I was also a bit tired. Maybe it's a better 
parasite than I had thought.

(*I don't really have any piercings.)
