
It felt, for the first time this week, like we had found a serene rhythm, as 
if we weren't forcing anything anymore but just freewheeling. As I looked at a 
dozen people round the table at lunch it felt, at last, like we had finished 
the scaffolding and that something in between was beginning to build itself. It 
reminded me of finding the zone when you're running or meditating, when you 
seem to switch off somehow and something else appears to take over the controls.

I think it happened because we've got a fairly clear timetable to the day and 
the week. Everyone knows what's happening when, and things get done without 
cajoling or reminding. Some people meet for silence in the chapel at 6.30am, 
someone does the livestock and lights the boiler, there's breakfast, then work; 
silence in the chapel again at 12.30pm, then lunch. Back to work, then flop, 
supper at 6ish and compline at 8.45pm. Nobody does it all, but it all gets 
done: someone does the shopping, or makes sure we're warm, or that the pigs are 
fed.

And the week, too, has a structure. There are set days when we're in the 
woods, or in the workshop, or with volunteers or doing our own thing. We've 
invented little traditions, such as Saturday night being (handmade) pizza 
night. We want to organise other fixtures like film night or music night or 
table-tennis tournaments: the fun stuff that makes our life together enjoyable 
and relaxing, not just hard work and exhausting.

That clear timetable means you rarely have to tap someone on the shoulder and 
remind them of what needs doing (or, more likely, be tapped on the shoulder 
yourself). There are rotas for doing the animals and the boiler, for the 
shopping and the cooking. It's all flexible and "swappable", of course, but 
there's clarity about the division of labour.

Some people need that clarity more than others. I get the impression that 
those emerging from chaotic lives need structure, or rhythm to life. One of the 
possible causes for the melancholy of modern life is that we don't have rhythm 
anymore: we don't have rituals or regularity. We don't feel the rise and fall 
of the weeks, let alone of the seasons.

Establishing rotas and timetables also means you're constantly surprised by 
other peoples' kindnesses. You're making an omelette and discover that someone 
else has brought in the eggs from the chicken coop; you're cooking and someone 
has laid the table; you want to flop on the sofa and someone has lit a fire. In 
any kind of communal life, it's easy to see only the negatives: "Someone has 
got mud everywhere" or "Someone hasn't put the tape measure back where it 
belongs" (that really drives me nuts, even though it's usually me). The joy of 
sharing labour is that "someone" becomes a source of help rather than 
irritation.

That, after all, is one of the many reasons I'm here. I simply don't believe 
in self-reliance and independence. I don't think it's possible to do it all by 
myself. I'm much more drawn to Satish Kumar's declaration of dependence – "You 
are, therefore I am" – than I am to Sartre's silly line that "Hell is other 
people." Hell is trying to do everything – job, children, house, garden, 
animals, money – by yourself.

I wonder whether another reason for the melancholy of modern life is that, in 
our search for so-called freedom, we flee from "duty" or "obligation". We don't 
want those burdens and we don't see that they can be liberating. I once offered 
to help a guy in a community with his chores and he was cross, because that was 
his role. He found it rewarding, not tedious. If we were to accept more duties, 
we would do things for others and they would do things for us. There would be 
reciprocity, appreciation, and more spare time.

There are drawbacks to rotas and timetables. It can make a family home feel 
institutionalised and, unless you're clever, impede spontaneity. But I glimpsed 
serenity this week because we were all looking after each other; anticipating 
and meeting each others' needs in tiny but kind ways. As Johnny Cash sang, "Get 
rhythm when you get the blues."

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
