
John Ruskin thundered, "There was a rocky valley between Buxton and 
Bakewell... divine as the vale of Tempe; you might have seen the gods there 
morning and evening - Apollo and the sweet Muses of Light... You enterprised a 
railroad... You blasted its rocks away... And now every fool in Buxton can be 
at Bakewell in half-an-hour, and every fool in Bakewell at Buxton."

Call me a fool, but I can see any number of good reasons to be in Bakewell, 
where Sir Richard Arkwright built Cromford Mill, housing his revolutionary 
water-powered spinning machine driven by the River Derwent, where Elizabeth 
Bennet met the Darcys and Mr Bingley in Pride And Prejudice and where an 
anonymous cook at the White Horse Inn (now the Rutland Arms) invented the 
Bakewell pudding.

Pudding or tart? Tart or pudding? I think in this case we must assume that the 
tart came before the pudding because, according to legend, in the 1860s the 
cook used puff pastry instead of shortcrust, and filled the middle with a 
custard-like mixture of eggs, butter, sugar and almonds on top of a layer of 
jam, instead of a more traditional frangipane (ie, almond-based) sponge over a 
layer of jam, which the tart offers up. Pernickety, spoilsport historians say 
that's all tosh and note that the antecedents of the pie go back to the middle 
ages and that the first reference to the Bakewell pudding as such is by one Meg 
Dodds in 1826, and that the great Eliza Acton gives a recipe for Bakewell 
pudding in 1845. Oh well.

Should you have a yen to explore the whole issue of Bakewell puddings and 
tarts, you can wander between Bakewell Pudding Parlour, a family business where 
they have been making puddings for more than 20 years; the Bakewell Tart Shop & 
Coffee House, owned by the Jackson family, who have been making tarts for more 
than 50 years (and puddings on the side); and the Old Original Bakewell Pudding 
Shop, which looks as if it has been here since Elizabeth Bennet visited the 
town, purveyors of a classy pud in a myriad of shapes and sizes.

There's obviously something about Bakewell that encourages a certain kind of 
entrepreneurial spirit. How many towns the size of Bakewell, I wondered, could 
boast a Tiroler Stüberl, Austrian Coffee Shop & Sausage Importer? That very 
phrase "sausage importer" rang like the toot of an alpenhorn in my imagination, 
and, yes, there they were, bratwurst and wiener würstel, debreciner and 
knackwurst, alongside Mozart balls and packets of Austrian coffee. It's not as 
if there weren't enough butchers in Bakewell - four - to supply the whole of 
Derbyshire with sausages, not to mention local meats, pies and bacon. Two 
seemed particularly fine: Andrew Armstrong and Critchlows.

Perhaps the most improbable of places in Bakewell is Frederick's Gelateria & 
Cafe, award-winning ice-cream makers, cafe owners and, most recently, 
micro-brewers. The Bakewell branch lurks behind a fine Edwardian front, but if 
you think you are going into a stuffy, old-fashioned interior you're in for a 
shock because what you find is sharp, shiny and chic, where you can get a 
snack, a glass of champagne, a Class A espresso and splendid ice cream, 
including - almost inevitably - a Bakewell pudding version.

The Frederick's story is a romantic one, and a reminder of how much we owe 
immigrant communities. An Italian family from Parma came to Britain in the 
1890s. They set up shop in Sheffield, but moved to Chesterfield in 1925, 
trading under the name of Russell. A Russell daughter married a Frederick son, 
and a new brand was born, a brand that has prospered all over the Peak 
District. The present bearer of the name is John Frederick, who is as 
passionate about his collection of veteran ice-cream vans as he is about his 
products.

· This article was amended on Tuesday May 6 2008. Richard Arkwright built his 
revolutionary water-powered spinning mill at Cromford on the Derwent river, 
rather than the Wye. This has been corrected.
