
I attached the surfboard by a leash to my ankle, picked it up and walked into 
the sea at Croyde Bay in north Devon. I was buffeted backwards and side-to-side 
as I pushed my way into deeper water, stopping when it reached my chest, and 
turning the board around to face the beach.

"Jump on," said my instructor, the professional surfer Lyndon Wake 
<http://lyndonwake.com/>, owner of a surf school nearby.

I positioned myself on the board: ramrod straight, face forward, hands tucked 
under my chest. The water swelled, Lyndon tugged the board towards the beach 
and, as he let go, the sound faded out, the chop of the sea disappeared and, 
for lack of a better description, I was flying. In that single glide to the 
beach, I was hooked.

I am not a surfer. I'm a science writer, and for the past year I've been 
writing a book on water. My attitude to water has been largely utilitarian – 
where it comes from, how we use it. Swimming in open water or riding 30-metre 
waves – these things are way out of my comfort zone. But I've become intrigued 
by people whose lives centre around water.

Surfers obsess about water, they seem to need it in their lives. By giving 
surfing a try, I wanted to know if I could understand what made them think so 
differently to me.

They're certainly more hardy when it comes to the weather. The wind and rain 
was so heavy on the morning of my lesson, I thought Lyndon might call it off 
but he seemed to barely notice the rain-induced rivers across the rocks as we 
walked our surfboards down to the beach. In the distance, a couple of die-hard 
surfers leapt around in the sea.

Lyndon had explained that the classic surfer's move of jumping on to the board 
would be too advanced for me on my first lesson, so he showed me a slower, 
easier way to stand. I would push myself into a semi-press-up position, slide 
my knees up to my hands and then place my left leg in between my hands. From 
there, I'd straighten my knees.

We practised on the beach a few times and it became clear that having strength 
in your upper body helps. As does a sense of balance – your body needs to be 
centred on the middle of the board, or you'll tip over.

After an exhilarating bit of body-boarding to get used to the water, I spent 
the next hour fighting to stand up. It became an impossible game on the moving 
surfboard, which could dump you off the moment your weight was not positioned 
dead centre. For the first half hour, I got as far as straightening my arms 
before I slid off.

Each time I came off, usually hitting the sand at the bottom, I stood up and 
battled my way back. I was determined to do it, however long it took, however 
many gulps of salty water I swallowed.

An hour and 10 minutes into the session, I managed it. It wasn't graceful but 
it felt like the achievement of my life. Lyndon whooped and gave me a high five.

Many of my apprehensions about open water proved unfounded. There are so many 
things to think about when you're surfing – what the water is doing, where the 
board is, your balance – that you are forced to be in the moment. It was one of 
those rare times when nothing else in the world was important. (Perhaps this is 
why surfers are so chilled?)

After a brief burst of sun, the rain was pelting down again, the wind was up 
and lightning flashed above the cliffs. I'd fallen into the water more times 
than I could count and my hips and arms were bruised from hitting the sand, 
hard, every time. But, as I positioned myself on the board again, another wave 
rearing up behind me, I couldn't wait to try again.

Details


Alok had his lesson with Lydnon Wke Surf School, near Croyde on the north 
Devon coast. For details of courses, visitlyndonwake.com 
<http://lyndonwake.com/> or call 01271 890078
