
Men are less likely than women to go to British universities, those who do are 
more likely to drop out and those who complete their course are less likely to 
get a good degree, according to a thinktank report.

Universities are being urged to set themselves targets to recruit more male 
students amid growing alarm about the widening gender gap in higher education.

One of the report’s authors said the underachievement of men in higher 
education was a national scandal and called on universities to focus funding 
for widening participation on young men.


The Higher Education Policy Institute <http://www.hepi.ac.uk/> (HEPI) report 
proposes a “take our sons to university day”, modelled on the success of “take 
our daughters to work” days, and the use of male role models in activities 
aimed at widening participation among under-represented groups in higher 
education.

However, the National Union of Students (NUS) criticised the report, saying it 
had taken a complex issue and turned it into “a battle of the sexes”.

The report, entitled Boys to Men: The Underachievement of Young Men in Higher 
Education and How to Start Tackling It, says the proportion of men entering UK 
higher education institutions is at a record low.


In 2015, the gap between the sexes was a record 9.2 percentage points, meaning 
women are now 35% more likely to go to university than men. By the January 
deadline for university applications this year, 94,000 fewer men than women had 
applied, according to the university admissions service Ucas.

The gender disparity 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/05/gender-gap-uk-degree-subjects-doubles-eight-years-ucas-study>
 is particularly acute among those from disadvantaged backgrounds, with young 
women who were on free school meals 51% more likely to go into higher education 
than comparable young men. Disadvantaged white boys are the least likely of all 
groups to go to university, with just 8.9% continuing their studies.

For young men who get to university, previously unpublished data from the 
Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) shows that 8% drop out of their 
studies, compared with 6% of women. HESA figures also show women outperforming 
men in terms of degree classification, with 73% of women getting a 2:1 or 
above, compared with 69% of men.

“I think it’s a national scandal,” said Nick Hillman, co-author of the report 
and an HEPI director. “Nearly everyone seems to have a vague sense that our 
education system is letting young men down, but there are few detailed studies 
of the problem and almost no clear policy recommendations on what to do about 
it.”

 He acknowledged the challenges facing women in university and beyond, with 
female graduates earning less than their male peers, “lad culture” on campus 
and the poor promotion prospects for female academics.

“But policymaking is not a zero-sum game in which you have to choose between 
caring for one group or the other. Indeed, we can only tackle the 
socio-economic gap in higher education participation by focusing on the 
underachievement of young men, and particularly disadvantaged young white men,” 
he said.

Sorana Vieru, the NUS vice-president, said: “This report takes a complex and 
nuanced issue and turns it into a ‘battle of the sexes’. It obscures the 
socio-economic issues that impact young working class men’s progression after 
school into education and employment.”

She objected to the suggestion that female teachers were part of the reason 
boys did not do as well as girls at school, saying there was no evidence to 
support the claim.

Men continue to dominate subjects such as engineering and technology, physical 
sciences, computer science, architecture and mathematical sciences, while some 
of the increase in women’s participation in higher education can be explained 
by a shift to graduate entry for female-dominated careers such as nursing and 
teaching.

Earlier educational attainment is a key factor behind the gender disparity, 
the report says, with girls outperforming boys in primary and secondary 
education. It says boys “work less hard at school”, are more likely to play 
video games and spend time on the internet and are less likely to read for 
pleasure.

Another factor is that there is a greater financial incentive for women to go 
to university. Female graduates earn three times as much as women without a 
degree, while male graduates earn around twice as much as other men.

Jo Johnson, the universities and science minister, said: “While we are seeing 
record application rates from disadvantaged backgrounds, this report shows that 
too many are still missing out. That is why our recent university access 
guidance for the first time called for specific support for white boys from the 
poorest homes.”

Les Ebdon, director of the Office of Fair Access to Higher Education 
<https://www.offa.org.uk/>, said the low participation rate of disadvantaged 
white men was a “shocking and avoidable waste of talent” and urged universities 
and colleges to take action.
