
I would have my last meal at my home in Oxfordshire. My husband [South African 
writer Rayne Kruger] wrote about China a lot and so when he decided to dig a 
pond in the garden he fashioned it after the willow pattern, with a bridge and 
a pagoda, both painted red.

We often have a drink down there at sunset. My children played endlessly there 
when they were little, and now their kids do too. At the weekends there’s 
always someone swimming or fishing. We also have an annual family sports day 
with ridiculous races on the lawn, including the underpants race.

It would be spring, June, and I’d have an evening barbecue with my family. 
There’d be a starter of hot grilled mackerel fillets on a cold lentil salad 
with an onion and mango relish, then lamb steaks with garlic and rosemary, and 
grilled and charred potatoes, perhaps with a simple green salad.

At barbecues, people just like to eat a lot of meat; it’s extraordinary. They 
eat far more than they normally would at a dinner party. I’d rather go veggie 
for three weeks, then have a barbecue, than eat fancy dishes at every meal.

We’d probably drink quite a lot. We’d start with champagne, then move on to an 
Italian red from Potentino in Tuscany – delicious. We might have beer, too. I 
attended a pork and beer-tasting dinner recently. I went reluctantly but ended 
up having the most wonderful evening. They served various craft beers in small 
glasses, pairing a different one with each of the five courses. Ever since, 
I’ve been buying craft beers wherever I go.

For dessert I think I’d just have a big bowl of black cherries, sitting on 
ice-cubes. It’s something we’d do on hot evenings at my restaurant years ago. 
The number of people who just had a handful and didn’t bother with all that 
cream …

We’d finish with fireworks. My daughter got married not so long ago, and we 
had fireworks, with the pond in the background, and of course that was 
fantastic. So at the end, just before you drown me, or whatever it is that 
makes this my last meal, we’d have a big display.

This would all have to happen by magic: the food, the fireworks. I don’t want 
to slave away at this or have lots of people running around either.

Mackerel fillets with a lentil and mango salad

Serves 4
4 large mackerel fillets, boned but skin on
Olive oil
Salt and pepper

For the lentil salad
250 g cooked green lentils
Flesh of one small ripe mango, cut into tiny cubes
1 red onion, finely chopped
1 garlic clove, crushed
2 tbsp olive oil
1 tsp red wine vinegar
Salt and black pepper

1 With a very sharp knife make two parallel slanting cuts through the skin, 
but not deep into the flesh, of the mackerel fillets. Brush with olive oil.

2 Combine the salad ingredients and divide between four plates.

3 Grill the mackerel fillets, skin side to the heat, until the skin is crisp 
and browning, either under a blazing grill, or on an oiled griddle plate if 
over a barbecue. Don’t turn. When done, use a fish slice to lift them on top of 
the salad and eat at once. The contrast of hot and cold is great.
