
Amazing greys! What are they? No, don’t tell me – the walls are Spitalfields 
Shroud, marvellous, that absolutely contemporary but completely matt 
been-there-for-ever thing? No, then that’s got to be Ruined Flesh, with the 
paintwork in English Corpse eggshell – the darker one, of course: the lighter 
Corpse comes out horribly yellow. Cornice and ceiling both Tamoxifen? Thought 
so, that’s such an amazing warm grey, with the underlying lilac. Without being 
remotely pink, that’s the beauty of it.

I don’t know if you’ve seen an entire wall done in Sackville White, God knows 
how they call it refined. We did the hall without testing, came out looking 
like a bordello, took three coats of Broiled Cod to cover it up, lesson totally 
learned. Now I wouldn’t dream of repainting a room without proper preparation. 
Six months, minimum, alternating natural and artificial light through the 
seasons, though it took nine to get the right grey for the nursery bathroom – 
Mildewed Pancreas, kind of chalky rain cloud with a hint of internal organ? The 
perfect east-facing grey, now that Filthy Sludge is such a cliche.

Related: Modern tribes: the clean-eating blogger 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/05/modern-tribes-clean-eating-blogger>

Yes, a lot of people think Pancreas is too blue, but that’s only on a winter 
morning, or twilight. Mostly it’s this wonderful, almost-neutral-but-not-quite 
grey, and it goes with everything – we’ve got Tinker’s Arse on the floorboards, 
this deep, almost murky grey, then Brassiere on the dado rail, with Dog’s 
Breakfast underneath, an intenser grey with an almost fathomless quality, 
that’s once we stopped trying to get it colour-matched. Joke! I know, never 
listen to a professional decorator unless you want to go insane, especially not 
with greys, the pigments are so critical, but try telling them. I said to ours, 
listen, if you just want something washable you can see your face in, be my 
guest.

Personally, I don’t want to live in a dishwasher, plus grey won’t be in for 
ever, who cares about hardwearing if we’re redecorating in two years? You know 
the real secret? If a paint goes on brilliantly, and doesn’t mark when you look 
at it, don’t touch it with a bargepole.
