
Sky has had its claim that it offers the fastest broadband speeds in the UK 
shot down afterBT <https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> lodged a 
complaint with the advertising watchdog.

The media group ran a press ad claiming it offered the fastest broadband 
speeds in peak time, citing Ofcom research comparing it with rivals BT, Plusnet 
and EE on a 38Mb connection.

BT challenged the claim, arguing it was misleading because the research by 
Ofcom was only on fixed-line performance, and did not include internet usage 
over Wi-Fi, which is very common.

Sky replied that the ad was not misleading as it included a caveat that the 
claim was based purely on Ofcom’s report comparing fixed-line broadband, so 
wider performance claims, such as those for Wi-Fi, were not necessary.

The ASA said, while the claim was accurate in relation to the parameters of 
the report, many people used Wi-Fi in their homes.

Related: Miserden, the UK village with worse internet than Mount Everest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2016/mar/06/miserden-cotswolds-village-worse-internet-mount-everest>

“Consumers were likely to interpret ‘fastest peak-time speeds’ to mean the 
speeds they would receive in the home environment, including when they were 
using their devices wirelessly,” said the ASA.


The ad made a reference to Sky’s Wi-Fi-enabled set-top box, which the ASA said 
enhanced the impression the claim also referred to wireless internet speed, and 
the caveat that it was based only fixed-line performance was only included in a 
footnote.

“Because the ad did not make clear that the ‘fastest peak time speeds’ claim 
related to fixed-line broadband performance only, and therefore did not include 
Wi-Fi performance, we concluded that the claim was misleading,” said the ASA. 
“The ad must not appear again in its current form. We told Sky UK to ensure 
that in future they made clear that speed claims related to fixed-line 
performance only, if that was the case.”
