
Smoky corn and avocado ceviche

Peruvian food is all the rage, particularly ceviche, which makes the most 
refreshing main course and will add a touch of summer to these autumnal days. 
Adjust the amount of chilli to suit your taste (and depending on how hot your 
chillies are). Serves four.

400g boneless and skinless sea bass fillets, cut into 1.5cm dice (around 
8 small fillets)
½ red onion, peeled and thinly sliced 
2 red chillies, one thinly sliced on an angle, the other finely diced 
2 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly sliced 
Grated zest of ½ lime, plus 3 tbsp lime juice 
Maldon sea salt 
2½ tbsp sunflower oil 
2 corn cobs 
2 tbsp rice vinegar 
¼ tsp caster sugar 
1 medium-sized ripe avocado, peeled and fleshly diced 
10g coriander leaves, chopped

Put the fish, onion, sliced chilli and garlic in a glass bowl. Add the lime 
juice and a quarter-teaspoon of sea salt and stir. Cover with clingfilm and 
refrigerate for two hours, stirring a couple of times along the way.

 While the fish is in the fridge "cooking", prepare the corn. Put 
a heavy-based pan on a high heat. Brush the corn with half a tablespoon of oil 
and char-grill for eight to 10 minutes, turning regularly. You want the flesh 
to get lots of dark, charred bits and the corn to be very smoky. Remove from 
the heat and, once cool enough to handle, use a large, sharp knife to shave the 
corn from the cob. Cut close to the husk to get big clumps of kernels (they 
look better in the finished dish).

Once the fish is "cooked", strain off the liquid. Whisk the vinegar, sugar and 
three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt with the remaining oil, pour over the 
strained fish and stir gently. Add the corn, avocado and coriander, and fold 
through very gently. Transfer to a serving bowl, garnish with the lime zest and 
diced chilli, and serve.

Corn and spring onion pancakes

Of all the corn pancakes I have tried over the years, these are the easily the 
most successful. They are fluffy and spongy, but definitely not soft in terms 
of flavour. Makes 15 pancakes, or enough to serve four to six people.

6 corn cobs
½ tbsp olive oil
6 spring onions, finely chopped
1 green chilli
1 tsp ground cumin
1½ tsp soft brown sugar
2 eggs
Salt and white pepper
100g plain flour
120g clarified butter
2 limes, cut into wedges

Put a ridged griddle pan on high heat until smoking. Brush one cob with oil 
and char-grill for five minutes, turning regularly, until charred all over. Set 
aside.

With a sharp knife, separate the kernels from the other five cobs and put them 
in the bowl of a food processor. Add half the spring onion, the chilli, cumin, 
sugar, one egg, three-quarters of a teaspoon of salt and half a teaspoon of 
pepper, blitz for 45 seconds until fairly smooth, then transfer to a bowl. 
Separate the last egg and add the yolk to the mix, followed by the flour and 
remaining spring onion. Cut the smoky corn off its cob and gently stir in. 
Whisk the egg white to soft peaks and fold in.

Heat a large frying pan and add half the butter. Add 60g of batter and fry on 
medium heat for two minutes a side until golden brown. Remove and keep warm 
while you cook the rest, adding butter as necessary. Serve warm with the lime 
wedges.

• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi <http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk> 
andNopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com/> in London. His new book, Jerusalem, 
co-written with Sami Tamimi, is published by Ebury Press at £27. To order a 
copy for £16 (inc free UK mainland p&p), go totheguardian.com/bookshop 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780091943745>
, or call 0330 333 6846.
