
The publisher of the Sun and the Times is working with a smartphone data 
security company that will monitor websites visited by “all staff” raising the 
possibility that journalists will be monitored.

News UK said it is working with British company Wandera 
<https://www.wandera.com/>, which specialises in mobile data security and 
management, to roll out an app to control staff phone costs. Journalists were 
not expected to use the app, it said.

However, an internal email sent to staff by the technical department at News UK
 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/newsinternational> has raised concern among 
employees, with some Sun journalists even trialling the app. The email, which 
unveils a new mobile data monitoring system for “all staff”, said “all your 
traffic will pass through Wandera, whether you use the mobile for business or 
personal uses”.

It continued: “The Wandera system will record every website address you visit 
… and the volume of traffic to and from that website. Usage reports will be 
provided to News UK.”

News UK said there was nothing sinister about its use of Wandera and that it 
was an effort to cut down on “exceptionally large” mobile bills that have been 
run up by some staff using data-heavy streaming services such as YouTube, 
Netflix, and catchup and live TV apps.

Staff with company phones have enjoyed unlimited data packages.

In January, the Daily Telegraph installed devices that monitored whether 
people were at their desks, but removed them after it washeavily criticised by 
the National Union of Journalists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/11/daily-telegraph-to-withdraw-devices-monitoring-time-at-desk-after-criticism>
 for carrying out “surveillance” on its staff.


Last June, BBC News staff voiced concerns after they were told that the 
corporationcould track their work mobile devices 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/15/bbc-news-staff-tracking-work-phones>
 after it introduced a new technical feature.

Under the new Wandera system staff affected will be limited to just 1Gb of 
data per month with certain services “such as video and music streaming”, only 
accessible when a user is connected to Wi-Fi. If a user runs over their monthly 
allowance, mobile access will be limited to a list of services including phone 
calls, social media applications such as Twitter and Facebook, maps, email and 
“News UK websites and applications”.

Journalists have received the email on the technical installation of Wandera, 
and a number have installed it already as the email states it is a system for 
“all” staff, but it is not understood to be for journalists on the Times and 
Sunday Times.

The app is understood to be aimed primarily at staff in corporate and 
back-office roles. “Like most large companies, News UK has introduced a limit 
to the amount of mobile data that can be used on company devices,” said a 
spokeswoman for News UK. “Once the limit is reached, certain work-related sites 
can still be accessed. Wi-Fi access remains unlimited and some staff are exempt 
depending on their role.”

News UK said the Wandera app was not being used in any way to track or monitor 
staff but purely to cut down on mobile phone bills.
