
During my schooldays I was forever being told to tuck in my shirt. It bothered 
me – I couldn’t see the relationship between my shirt and my ability to learn. 
One day, when my history teacher barked his familiar request to “tuck that 
shirt in”, I asked why.

I was all but dragged to the deputy headteacher’s office and it was there I 
first heard about the “hidden curriculum”.

We teachers have a peculiar obsession with enforcing dress codes on our 
students. Checking top buttons are done up, ties are tied, telling people where 
and when they can wear coats – we keep vigilant for the most minor 
transgressions. The reasoning comes from the “broken windows” theory: if we 
show zero tolerance to small infractions of the rules, it sends a clear message 
that greater crimes will be tolerated even less.

In fact, when failing schools start to turn things around, a clampdown on 
uniform usually marks the beginning of their brave new era. Get the uniform 
right and the rest will follow.

Related: Secret Teacher: I refuse to let the negativity in teaching bring me 
down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/02/secret-teacher-refuse-negativity-teaching-bring-down>

The past few weeks, however, have been a shocking reminder to me that such 
sartorial scrutiny is not reserved only for students. For the simple 
revolutionary act of not to wearing a tie to work for a few days I, a teacher, 
was once again made to feel like a naughty schoolboy.

As you may have guessed, I have never liked wearing ties – I find them 
constrictive and uncomfortable – but had perceived them as a necessary evil of 
the job. A while ago I was discussing this with a colleague who pointed out 
that there was no explicit rule in our school’s dress code about ties, we just 
needed to look professional. So when the weather warmed up I decided not to 
wear one.

Comfortable and happy, I got on with my job. I noticed a few raised eyebrows, 
but no one from senior management mentioned anything, and, of course, my 
students were not fazed. Little did I know, however, that behind the scenes 
meetings were being held at the highest levels. Then there was a knock at my 
door.

The first manager tried the friendly approach. There was a lot of grinning and 
attempted camaraderie while I was instructed to reinstate my neckwear. When 
this failed, a second leader gave me the same message – without any smiling. 
Holding my ground, I explained I had already discussed the matter and was 
awaiting a chat with the head.

I had not chosen to go tie-less as an act of rebellion – this was not the hill 
I had chosen to die on. But I was becoming increasingly frustrated that such a 
big deal was being made about this throwaway decision. When Barack Obama met 
Prince William and Harry on his recent UK visit, neither wore a tie. A tie-less 
David Cameron was recently seen campaigning for Zac Goldsmith, before Goldsmith 
was defeated by a tie-less Sadiq Khan. We live in a world where presidents, 
princes, mayors and ministers regularly carry out state business without 
wearing a tie. Surely a teacher need not die by this noose?

Was I not the same “outstanding” teacher without a tie that I was two weeks 
ago when I was wearing one? It seemed preposterous that a piece of fabric 
dangling from my neck could matter so much. But the head finally told me, in no 
uncertain terms, that a tie was not optional. Her ruling was accompanied by a 
thinly veiled threat about being valued and how it would be a great shame if I 
rocked the boat over something as insignificant as a tie.

The only school rule I was breaking was an unwritten one: that we must wear 
ties to set a good example for the boys who are required to wear them each day. 
But there are many things staff can do that students cannot. We ignore one-way 
systems, stay in school buildings at lunchtime and eat and drink in our 
classrooms. Students are intelligent enough to recognise nuance (and, probably, 
hypocrisy). Can’t we credit them with that same intelligence when it comes to 
clothing?

Related: Secret Teacher: let the government think I'm a failure, I've got my 
own success criteria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/09/secret-teacher-government-think-failure-own-success-criteria>

I felt disappointed more than anything. In a profession that demands more and 
more every year, were they really going to take this from me too? With our 
breaks frequently given up to detentions, clubs and interventions; our evenings 
and weekends consumed with marking, planning, reports and paperwork; our 
holidays given over to wrapping our heads around new syllabuses and 
specifications, the sliver of personal autonomy I enjoyed when choosing not to 
wear a tie was a glimmer of freedom. When professional morale is at an all-time 
low and people are leaving the profession in droves, is it really worth 
alienating those of us heroically clinging on?

Not a single student had their education affected by the absence of my tie, 
but for those few glorious days I had one less obstacle in the way of enjoying 
a job that is more and more difficult to love. Ironically, individual liberty 
is one of the “fundamental British values” we are required to teach but it 
seems no one – not students, and least of all teachers – is allowed the liberty 
to challenge even the most trivial aspect of a school’s authority.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
