
“Isn’t it incredible to have this all to ourselves? On a Saturday!”

I’m exploring the south coast of Mauritius with Laurent Marrier d’Unienville, 
and we’ve paused at Jacotet Bay. Crowning its perfect (and perfectly empty) arc 
of sand is Îlot Sancho, a jagged coral islet topped with monkey apple trees. 
Two centuries ago, it was a hideout for swashbuckling French corsairs.

Related: A perfect day in Mauritius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/ba-guide-to-mauritius-2016/ng-interactive/2016/apr/01/a-perfect-day-in-mauritius>

“My kids love it here. Each time we come, we hunt for buried treasure,” says 
d’Unienville, whose new tour company,Electro-Bike Discovery 
<http://www.electrobikemauritius.com/?lang=en>, shows visitors beautiful, 
little-known spots such as this.

During my stay here, I’ve drunk water from a freshly lopped coconut, wandered 
through bird-rich filao groves and chatted with kitesurfers who have fallen so 
profoundly in love with this part of the island that they’ve made it their home.

But while luxurious beach holidays have been this lovely Indian Ocean island’s 
brioche-and-butter for 40 years, far-sighted Mauritians are now beginning to 
broaden their approach.

Their nearish neighbours the Seychelles may be more exclusive, and the 
Maldives better for diving and snorkelling; but for history, culture, striking 
inland landscapes and sheer variety, Mauritius trumps them both.

On a visit to the animated little capital, Port Louis, I discover the 
21st-century reasoning behind its gradual reinvention.

“Around a third of our visitors are British or French, but in 2015 by far our 
biggest growth was in tourists from China, Germany and India,” says Marcel Noé, 
an expert on Mauritian history, culture and tourism. “Germans love adventure 
and nature as much as beaches, and the Chinese and Indians are drawn here by 
their cultural connections – they aren’t really into ‘could-be-anywhere’ 
sunshine resorts at all.”

Uninhabited until 1638, this is an island of immigrants. It was still bursting 
with ebony trees, dodos, fruit bats and giant tortoises when the pioneers 
arrived – Dutch settlers, who brought in the first of many shipments of slaves 
from Madagascar to clear swathes of forest for timber and sugar cane. Their 
French successors, who founded Port Louis, were followed in 1810 by the 
British, who pledged to honour the island’s customs, laws and traditions, with 
the result that French is still widely spoken today. But the language that the 
whole island shares is Creole, a French-based plantation argot with an 
African-Asian twang.

Committed to outlawing slavery, the British created indenture, a system that, 
according to its critics, was slavery by another name. Between 1834 and 1910, 
around 462,000 plantation labourers arrived at the Aapravasi Ghat immigration 
centre in Port Louis, now a world heritage site. Most came by ship from Mumbai, 
Kolkata or Madras and two thirds ended up staying; a significant majority of 
today’s Mauritians are of Indian descent. As we tour the impressive Beekrumsing 
Ramlallah Interpretation Centre, a cultural history museum that opened at the
Aapravasi Ghat 
<http://www.aapravasighat.org/English/Your%20Visit/Pages/default.aspx> in 2014, 
I ask Noé whether there’s resentment over what happened in the past. “We try to 
keep a sense of perspective,” he says. “There were good masters, as well as 
bad.”

Today, Mauritius manages to remain peaceful without defaulting into 
homogeneity. In Port Louis, we pass British and French street names, Anglican 
and Catholic cathedrals, Chinese-run shops, historic mosques, Tamil temples in 
fondant icing colours and locals swapping greetings in Creole.

Down on the waterfront at Yuzu 
<http://www.labourdonnais.com/world-class-restaurants-labourdonnais-business-hotel-mauritius/yuzu-restaurant.html>
, the capital’s top fine-dining restaurant, executive chef Nizam Peeroo serves 
the island on a plate.

“Whatever our individual origins, we all feel comfortable with flavours from 
India, China, south-east Asia, Africa and Europe,” he says. “Food brings us 
together. Separately, each dish has its own identity, but together, they’re all 
Mauritian, just like we are ourselves.”

Emma Gregg stayed on Mauritius at the five-star all-inclusive Heritage Awali 
Golf & Spa Resort, and at the Heritage Le Telfair Golf & Spa Resort. See 
ba.com/heritageawali for more information


Fly British Airways to Mauritius

British Airways Holidays offers seven nights at the five-star Heritage Awali, 
from £1,309 per person, travelling on selected dates in June. Includes World 
Traveller return flights from London Gatwick and all-inclusive accommodation. 
Call0344 493 0778 or visit ba.com/heritageawali  <http://ba.com/heritageawali>
