
Tony Blair has moved to end talk of a rift with Ed Miliband 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> as he pledged to offer 
whatever support the Labour leader wants in the runup to the 7 May election.

With Miliband under intense pressure after a succession of business leaders 
criticised his policies as bad for the country, the former prime minister made 
clear that he was ready to aid Miliband’s push to restoreLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to power.

The Observer understands that talks between Labour officials and Blair’s 
office have been going on for weeks about the role he might play in the 
election campaign.

Asked whether the three-time election-winning Labour leader was prepared to 
throw his support behind the campaign, Blair’s office said that regarding “his 
involvement in the party’s election campaign, he will do whatever the party 
wants”.

While Blair’s presence in the campaign will inevitably be controversial, the 
declaration is a sign that the leading lights of New Labour are prepared to 
rally behind the current leader.

Labour sources say Blair would be ideally placed to counter recent bruising 
attacks on Miliband from some Tory-supporting entrepreneurs, by arguing that 
the Tories would do far more damage to British business if they opened the way 
for the UK to leave the EU.

David Cameron, whose party is under heavy pressure from Ukip, has promised to 
hold a referendum on EU membership by the end of 2017 if he is returned to 
Downing Street.

A majority of Tory cabinet ministers say they will back a British exit unless 
he can renegotiate terms of membership. Most business leaders, however, are 
strongly in favour of the UK staying in.

In a recent interview with the Economist, Blair suggested he had reservations 
about Miliband’s strategy, saying the election looked like becominga battle 
between traditional leftwing and rightwing parties, 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/30/tony-blair-ed-miliband-general-election-labour>
 with the right most likely to win. He later said he had not meant that 
Miliband was on course to lose.

But with his former spin doctor Alastair Campbell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/alastaircampbell> now heavily involved in 
preparing Miliband for TV debates, Blair will know he cannot be absent from the 
campaign without fuelling further damaging speculation.

Despite a bruising couple of weeks, during which two members of Blair’s 
cabinet – Alan Milburn and John Hutton – both raised questions about Miliband’s 
policies, Labour appears to be holding on to a narrow lead over the Tories.

The latest survey by Opinium for the Observer puts Labour on 34% 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/07/labour-conservatives-opinion-poll-miliband-cameron>
, two points ahead of the Tories.

Peter Mandelson, another New Labour luminary, who has recently criticised 
Labour’s plan for a mansion tax on 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/20/lord-mandelson-mansion-tax-labour-miliband>
 properties worth more than £2m, also lined up behind the Labour leader.

The former minister and Blair ally said Miliband would “make a very good prime 
minister” and was not anti-business. Mandelson also said that a newspaper claim 
that he had sounded out Alan Johnson as an alternative Labour leader last 
autumn was “complete rubbish”. Campbell, the other senior Labour figure quoted 
as having sounded out Johnson, has also denied the claim.

Mandelson told BBC Radio 4’s Today Programme that he had spoken to Johnson 
only because of speculation about him standing: “As a rather good friend of 
Alan Johnson, it would be rather strange if I didn’t phone him and find out 
what all this hype was about.

“I think I probably teased him a bit and suggested it was the publicity agent 
… whipping up media interest to boost sales of his book … But the rest of the 
story is complete rubbish.”

Over the past week, Labour has been under siege over its stance on business, 
after the boss of Boots said a Miliband premiership could be a “catastrophe”.

Mandelson accepted that more needed to be done to counter the impression being 
created, but said the criticism was a deliberate attempt to misrepresent the 
party’s position.

He said the greatest risk to business would come from a Tory party that 
offered a referendum on EU membership at which many Conservative MPs would 
campaign for a British exit. “The greatest risk for business in this country is 
that we have a Conservative-led government that unleashes the Tory party 
lemmings who are just determined to race over this cliff and take us out of 
Europe,” he said.
