
We got a call a few days ago from Pilsdon, the community that – as regular 
readers will know – is very much the model for what we're trying to do here. 
"Want any pigs?" asks John. We've been wanting to get pigs for ages in the hope 
that my wife Francesca, a native of Parma, can make the Somerset equivalent of 
Parma ham. And we especially love the idea of getting our pigs from Pilsdon. 
It's a bit like an Everton fan sourcing his garden turf from Goodison Park.

So a guest and I put a tarpaulin in the back of the car and drive south 
towards Bridport. We get quite a shock when we see the nine-week-old weaners. 
We were expecting cute little piglets the size of a young baby. These beasts 
are already massive and I'm beginning to think that we've bitten off more than 
we can chew.

It's an unusual litter: some look like Gloucestershire Old Spots, others like 
Saddlebacks or Oxford Sandy and Blacks. We mark four gilts (young females) that 
we like the look of with paint and then have to tag them before taking them off 
the farm. They writhe and kick furiously as we try to pick them up and punch 
the herd tag between the veins of their ears. I'll never forget the deafening 
squeal of a scared weaner; it makes a baby's screaming sound like sweet, soft 
music. We put down straw on the tarp in the boot and tie bits of wood behind 
the headrests to stop the beasts taking over the wheel on the way back.

We go and have a cup of tea in the community's sunlit common room. It's a 
beautiful place – there's a huge fireplace, a wall of mullioned windows facing 
south towards the sea, and loads of armchairs and sofas and slices of toast. I 
chat with a few old friends and after tea a small crowd gathers in the 
courtyard for the amusing spectacle of us trying to get the pigs in the back of 
the car. It's a bit like the chicken-chasing scene inRocky. We pursue them 
around the pen, grab any bit of them we can and plonk them in the boot of the 
car.

The drive is fairly pungent. Back at ours we reverse up to the little top 
field and lift them over the electric fencing. Once again they writhe and 
scream. The poor weaners seem fairly terrified and lie on top of each other in 
a far corner. We put together the flat-pack pig ark and fill it with straw, but 
still the beautiful beasts are huddling in the corner.

Over the next few days everything changes. They let us get close to them and, 
having jumped and twitched every time we patted them, they now seem to enjoy 
being stroked and scratched. They run towards us now since they know we usually 
bring food: either pig nuts or windfall fruit. It's illegal to feed them any 
leftovers from the kitchen, but we're going to ask one or two local shops if we 
can take their out-of-date produce off their hands.

The girls and a guest come up with incongruous names: Annabelle, Princess, 
Harriet Pig Pog and Ginger. We're all completely taken with them. Quite often 
we go up there just to admire them and they actually sprint up to us – a 
hilarious sight – and start nuzzling our ankles as if demanding some grub. 
Within a few days the field has gone from green to brown. They've ploughed and 
fertilised large areas, but it doesn't smell too much. It just looks like a pig 
field.

I make it very clear that we'll be eating them next year and the girls seem to 
accept the fact. We love having the pigs here, but we're treating pig-keeping 
as a business that needs to contribute to our communal kitty. Weaners cost 
between 25 and 80 quid, depending on whether they're rare breeds. Although 
Pilsdon kindly gave us a discount, we've already spent a lot of money on them – 
the ark, the feed, the fencing and so on. And so, if it doesn't sound too 
cruel, we're already selling half and quarter pigs to friends and supporters. 
The plan is to keep one half for ourselves, sell another five halves and keep 
one sow, probably the beautiful Saddleback, for breeding next year. The Parma 
ham industry must be quaking in its Gucci boots.
