
Rob Painter and his partner Emma had been going through a rough patch when, 
one day in March, Emma took the children to visit her family at the other end 
of the country – and didn’t come back. “We’d been together six years,” says 
Painter, 33. “Emma was pregnant when I met her, and when she had Ava, I brought 
her up as my own. Then we had Bill and Cara. But a lot of things happened and 
it mounted up; we were arguing, my mother got diagnosed with cancer, and the 
debt we’d got into didn’t help. She didn’t like me working as a doorman, 
either, being out nights.”

Painter hadn’t realised his relationship was at breaking point, however, until 
Emma disappeared. “It was stupid, really; I’d gone to the casino the night she 
went and used her bank card,” he says. “I intended to pay her back, but she 
said it was the last straw. The worst thing was, she wouldn’t allow me access 
to the children. Not at all.”

The emotional impact was catastrophic, he says: he was drinking a lot, and at 
one point attempted suicide. “Not seeing my kids, it was so hard. I was used to 
seeing them every day. We’d brought them up from babies. I went into a massive 
depression.”

Desperate to see his children again, Painter began court proceedings. It was 
then he learned he would have to pay for his own lawyer. Since the removal of 
legal aid for virtually all family cases in April 2013, the state will not 
provide him – or indeed anyone except domestic abuse victims, in limited 
circumstances – with free legal advice or representation. Painter’s partner, 
Emma, took out a non-molestation order against him soon after she left, a move 
he believes was designed to ensure she was eligible for a state-funded lawyer. 
“She’s exaggerated and lied, and she’s done it to get legal aid,” he says.

Painter has no choice but to attend court as a “litigant in person”. He can’t 
afford to pay the hundreds, possibly thousands, of pounds that legal advice, 
letters and expert representation at hearings would cost. What money he can 
scrape together, he’d rather spend on the 350-mile round trip he now makes 
fortnightly to see his children.

We first met in May, at Bristol’s Civil and Family 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Justice Centre, when Painter 
had been called to his first hearing, with only four days’ notice to prepare. 
He had travelled from the north-east the night before. He was just about 
holding it together, but was clearly very anxious. Standing outside the 
courtroom in this bright, modern legal centre, he came across as a man in 
shock, poleaxed by the allegations of domestic abuse, furious that his children 
had been taken hundreds of miles away from what had been their family home, but 
also frightened about what the court would say about his right to see them in 
the future.

Smartly dressed in a dark suit, he had brought his mother and sister with him 
for support. They talked quietly among themselves, but it was clear the whole 
family was upset, angry and tense. As Painter’s ex and her lawyer walked past, 
everyone carefully avoided eye contact. Leafing anxiously through a folder 
thick with court documentation and witness statements, Painter said he wanted 
his children returned to his care so they could go back to their old school and 
the home in which they had grown up.

At both this first hearing and a second in July, I went into court to observe. 
Family cases are heard in private: journalists have the right to attend, but 
not to report any detail of what is said before the judge. I was able, however, 
to witness the extreme stress these individuals find themselves placed under.

Standing outside the courtroom, he came across as a man in shock, furious, but 
also frightened about the future

Every element of Painter’s case and how it would be managed was set out with 
painstaking care by District Judge Watson, so as not to disadvantage the man 
appearing in person before him. But despite the deliberate, calm and ordered 
tone set by the judge, the tension soared as an emotionally charged negotiation 
took place between Painter, his ex and her lawyer. With nobody to represent 
him, Painter had not only to think on his feet, but also try to express himself 
as calmly as he could, given the high stakes.

Although there isn’t typically much complex law to get to grips with in 
private family cases, litigants in person often arrive at court in a state of 
heightened emotion, says family barrister Lucy Reed, author ofThe Family Court 
Without A Lawyer 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/family-court-without-a-lawyer.html>: A 
Handbook For Litigants In Person. They have nobody with expert knowledge of the 
relevant statutes or court procedure on their side, and must negotiate their 
way alone through court hearings that will result in vital decisions about 
their futures. Where will their children live? How often will they get to see 
them? Under what conditions? How will the available finances be shared, so that 
everyone in a now-divided household can make ends meet?

“It is really tough for someone trying to litigate their own family case to be 
dispassionate,” Reed says. “There are people who are articulate and intelligent 
enough to speak for themselves, but whether they are ultimately able to manage 
it in the moment, in court, and when it’s about their children… That’s not 
always how it works out. The emotion can overwhelm them and it all just goes 
out the window.”

***

“There are massive ups and downs,” says Peter Johnson, 37, who is trembling 
and on the brink of tears when I first encounter him just before he goes into 
court. He is attempting to resolve a painful dispute around a shared residence 
order that was breached when his ex-wife took their six-year-old son to live in 
another part of the country.

The previous few days have been chaotic and frightening, Johnson explains. 
“Charlie mostly lives with his mum, but has always, regularly, since he was a 
baby, come to stay with me. We’d had some inkling that she wanted to move to a 
different city, but I share parental responsibility for Charlie: those sorts of 
decisions, and changing schools, can’t happen if I don’t agree.”

Feeling worried by his ex-wife’s plans, Johnson had applied under his own 
steam to the family court for a prohibited steps order. If granted, this would 
have prevented his ex-wife from removing their son from the area. But before 
his application could be heard, he got an email from her to say she had already 
gone, taking Charlie with her.

It was a huge shock. When he rang the court office to explain, a judge agreed 
to an emergency hearing. “The order was for Charlie to be returned home and 
that I should go and get him immediately,” Johnson says. He starts to shake 
again as he recalls that day. “At that point, because she wasn’t taking my 
calls, I had no idea where Charlie was.”

Johnson is still embroiled in proceedings months later, when I go to meet him 
at home with his wife, Sara. Toys are neatly tidied away, and outside the 
kitchen window, baby clothes are drying on the line. He and Sara sit close 
together.

I get panic attacks being in the same room as my ex. Her barrister coming to 
see me before we went in was intimidating

Johnson earns too much to have been eligible for legal aid, even when it was 
available, but he pays maintenance for his son, has a newborn baby and a 
toddler, and Sara is on maternity leave. Life is pretty stressful and, 
financially, the family is stretched. They don’t have a couple of grand – 
minimum – going spare, so despite the “incredible” strain of the situation, 
which mounts rapidly over the period in which I follow his case, Johnson is 
determined to see it through by himself.

Although he couldn’t be described as sanguine about the reality of 
representing himself – “I get minor panic attacks just being in the same room 
as my ex” – he does believe it’s possible to do a decent job on your own behalf 
in court. “You need to be able to control yourself, and you need a certain 
amount of empathy and understanding of the other person,” he says. “One of the 
toughest bits was my ex’s barrister coming to see me just before we went in. 
She started to try to negotiate. It was quite intimidating.”

Even for a well-educated, resourceful couple who have been able to seek advice 
from two lawyer friends and have argued effectively in court, appearing in 
person has taken an enormous toll. “It’s a very big ask, to expect a distraught 
parent to be calm and objective,” Sara says. She adds that she’s “been left 
with a huge amount of anger about this whole thing”. Johnson agrees that it has 
been “pretty horrible”. But, he says, “In terms of us, it’s made us stronger.”

According to the government’s own figures, in the last two years alone, 
600,000 people have been excluded from legal aid following cuts set out in the 
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act, which came into force in 
April 2013. So while Painter and Johnson may feel very alone when they’re in 
front of a judge, they are part of a rapidly growing group of people who are 
having to make their case on their own behalf in courts up and down the 
country. According to the National Audit Office, in the first year after family 
legal aid was dispensed with, there was a30% increase 
<http://www.nao.org.uk/report/implementing-reforms-to-civil-legal-aid/> in the 
number of cases in which neither party had legal representation in court. This 
rise, it is argued, is eating into available court time.

Far fewer cases can now be heard in a day, explains Julie Exton, president of 
theAssociation of Her Majesty’s District Judges 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/related-offices-and-bodies/representative-bodies-2/association-hm-district-judges/>
,writing in the Law Society Gazette 
<http://www.lawgazette.co.uk/analysis/comment-and-opinion/false-economies-afflicting-courts/5048323.fullarticle>
, “because the majority of the parties are without legal representation and, 
unsurprisingly, they tend not to get together with their former partner to try 
and narrow the issues” before coming in front of the judge. Now, much of a 
hearing has to be spent “not only explaining the process to the parties, but 
also calming them down”. Ex-partners see their day in court as “an opportunity 
to vent their hate of their former loved one; a parent who focuses on the best 
interests of their child is a rarity indeed”.

In his inaugural speech as the new president of the Law Society in July, 
solicitorJonathan Smithers asserted 
<http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/news/speeches/inaugural-speech-by-law-society-president-jonathan-smithers-july-2015/>
 that “the lack of access to justice in this country for a significant 
proportion of our population undermines society itself… Cuts to funding and 
changes in eligibility have left vulnerable people without representation... 
While we acknowledge the necessity for financial discipline, there are hard 
questions to be asked about what price society should be prepared to pay for 
justice and the very real consequences of not doing so.”

In February, Margaret Hodge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaret-hodge> MP, the then chair of the 
public accounts committee, openeda scathing report 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/news/report-implementing-reforms-to-civil-legal-aid/>
 on how the legal aid cuts were planned and implemented by saying how “deeply 
disturbing” it was that the Ministry of Justice’s actions were not based on 
evidence but driven by the aim of cutting costs as quickly as possible. “The 
ministry does not know, and has shown little interest in, the knock-on costs of 
its reforms across the wider public sector as a result of increased physical 
and mental health problems caused by the inability to access advice to resolve 
legal problems,” Hodge stated. “It therefore has no idea whether the projected 
£300m spending reduction in its own budget is outweighed by additional costs 
elsewhere.”

***

Another day in court, and a different litigant in person is sitting in a small 
airless room just off the main lobby. Amira Khalid, 28, recently fled what she 
says was an abusive marriage, taking her three children with her. The refuge 
where she secured a place was too far away from her older children’s school, so 
reluctantly she agreed they should return to live with their dad. “I am missing 
my kids,” she tells me softly. “They come to the refuge, but they have only two 
days with me.”

Khalid comes from Pakistan. She was brought to the UK by her British husband, 
whose application to the court for a decision about where their children should 
live has prompted this hearing today. Her English is limited. She is also 
undocumented: although she has just applied for indefinite leave to remain, she 
currently has no right to live in the UK and is terrified she will be sent back 
to Pakistan without her children. Simply entering a court with no solicitor to 
protect her interests is, from her point of view, extremely frightening. She 
will have to sit just metres from the man from whom she fled.

Khalid has another problem: no bank account. This means that although she 
meets the “merits” test for legal aid (as someone who says she is a victim of 
domestic abuse and has sought safety in a refuge), she can’t prove that she has 
no funds and so fails the “means” test. Given that domestic abuse is now 
understood to include controlling a victim’s access to money, using Khalid’s 
lack of a bank account as a reason to refuse legal aid seems baffling.

Amira’s English is limited, she's terrified of losing her children and is 
sitting metres from the man from whom she fled

Dressed in an embroidered black salwar kameez, her long hair held back in a 
band, Khalid sits quietly, her face tight, one hand repetitively rubbing her 
wrist as people talk about her case around her. Today, her husband will be 
represented by a lawyer whom he can afford to pay. She will be on her own. The 
imbalance in their positions is blindingly obvious. Exactly 800 years on from 
the signing ofMagna Carta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ng-interactive/2015/jun/15/magna-carta-read-the-document-in-full-interactive>
, its most famous and prized principle, “We will not sell, or deny, or delay 
right or justice to anyone”, must surely, to Khalid and others like her, ring 
very hollow indeed.

Suddenly there’s a flurry of action. The husband’s barrister and the duty 
officer for Cafcass (the organisation that represents children in disputed 
family cases) have drafted an agreement that they’re proposing to put before 
the judge. A piece of paper is handed over. The interpreter takes Khalid 
through it point by point.

“Is there anything she’s not happy with?” the Cafcass officer asks.

The interpreter asks the question. “She worries that the children will not be 
fed properly by the husband. She says he does not know about cooking,” he 
translates.

“Is there anything else that Mum would like to say in court?” the officer 
asks. “Anything at all?”

Khalid is staring at her lap. “If I get a solicitor, can I apply to change the 
order?” she asks quietly via the interpreter. “She is willing to agree this 
only as an interim measure,” he translates. Speaking faster now, Khalid becomes 
more agitated. “She has real concerns for her two older children.”

Since the cut in legal aid, solicitors, barristers and more recently even the 
judiciary have attempted ever more vociferously to highlight the procedural 
mountains that litigants in person must climb, and the injustice and delays 
caused to parents and, by extension, their children. Khalid’s case perfectly 
illustrates their concerns. Watching this woman, whose English is inadequate to 
the challenge before her, who knows she has no legal right to be in the country 
where her children were born, and who is now living in a refuge, sit down in a 
courtroom just a few seats away from her estranged husband and his lawyer, is 
to see an already disadvantaged person lose all agency before the law.

I call Khalid a couple of times after the hearing, to find out how her case is 
progressing. If she can prove her lack of income, she tells me, her hope is to 
secure a legally aided solicitor and make an urgent request for the court to 
reconsider the arrangements for the children as she tries to rebuild her life. 
“I don’t want full custody, but shared custody with the father,” she says. But 
when I ring again, a recorded message says the number can no longer receive 
calls. After more unanswered calls, I email her support worker. It turns out 
Khalid made a sudden decision to leave the refuge and go back home.

“She told me her husband was going to give her a new sim for her phone as soon 
as she came back to him, to avoid other individuals contacting her,” the 
support worker explains. Nobody from the refuge can get in touch with Khalid 
now, but as far as I can establish, she had not managed to secure legal aid 
when she decided to return to the man she says abused her.

The judge believed everything my ex said. I’m devastated. I feel like I’ve 
made a mess of it

This situation is one that barrister Lucy Reed understands all too well. “What 
worries me is that there will be a group of families who muddle along without 
coming to court or seeing the process through to getting a final, court-ordered 
outcome. That could be someone who’s been in a controlling or abusive 
relationship, who doesn’t qualify for legal aid, but feels they can’t withstand 
the court process on their own. Or they might fear the conflict going to court 
would generate, without a lawyer to buffer them. So they feel pushed to accept 
arrangements for themselves, or for a child, that aren’t appropriate or safe. 
Or you might have dads who think the court process is inherently biased against 
fathers, who feel disempowered and unable to pursue their case without help – 
so they don’t try, and the result is that they don’t have any contact with 
their children at all. That’s disastrous, for them and for their children. And 
of course there are some people who do make it to court, but aren’t able to 
effectively make their very good points, so you end up with less than robust 
results.”

A number of initiatives do exist to help litigants in person as they attempt 
to navigate their way through the legal jungle. Last year, the government made 
a £2m package available for information and support. Reed points out, however, 
that there is as yet no authorised, independent, government-funded website to 
assist people heading to court on their own, as wasrecommended in research 
commissioned by the Ministry of Justice 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/380479/litigants-in-person-in-private-family-law-cases.pdf>
 in November 2014. Frustration at this failure prompted a group of Bristol 
lawyers, including Reed, to write and launch their own online resource,Family 
Court Info <http://familycourtinfo.org.uk>; the site continues to be updated 
and edited by the city’s legal professionals for free.

The Personal Support Unit <https://www.thepsu.org/> (PSU) is a charity that 
provides trained volunteers to offer free assistance to people who are running 
their own case. The volunteers, who are not legal professionals, but may be law 
students or other people with an interest in supporting people in crisis, 
provide emotional support and can accompany a litigant into court. They are not 
permitted to offer legal advice, however, and though they can help people to 
understand complex and obscurely phrased court forms, they cannot advise them 
what to write. Demand for the PSU’s services is growing fast; it now has bases 
in 14 courts in 11 cities, and is expanding at a rate of four new offices a 
year. It has helped just short of 40,000 people over the past 12 months, a 
number that is projected to increase to 50,000 in 2015-16.

At Bristol’s central civil court, law students from the University of the West 
of England run a part-time drop-in where they offer legal assistance under 
supervision from their tutor. The area’s most senior family judge, Stephen 
Wildblood QC, has also instigated and personally runs free family law classes 
for members of the public. With fellow barristerSarah Phillimore 
<http://www.stjohnschambers.co.uk/profile/sarah-phillimore/> and others in the 
legal profession, Reed has just launched theBristol pro bono family scheme 
<http://www.familycourtinfo.org.uk/news/pro-bono-scheme-to-launch-in-november/>
, offering half an hour of free advice.

All this is welcome, but it cannot bridge the gap, insists Law Society 
president Smithers. On rough figures, he says, the government has removed half 
a billion pounds from civil and criminal legal aid. “You can’t make that up 
with free legal advice. Lawyers will do a few hours pro bono maybe, but what 
you won’t get is someone to take on a complicated case. No one would argue for 
a pro bono dentist or doctor: if you want proper professional legal advice, 
there’s a cost.”

The government’s swingeing cuts to the legal aid budget, Smithers argues, 
approach the problem of how to reform the nation’s justice system in the wrong 
way. “You can’t look at a system that’s built up over centuries, say it’s 
costing too much and slice off a bit here and there, because the outcome you 
get is probably not what you’d want,” he says. “You need to start by asking, 
‘What do we want to achieve, what does good justice look like, and how are we 
going to get that?’ The case we’re trying to make [to government] is that 
justice is as important to society as education and health. Justice is not 
about going to court, it’s about achieving a fair outcome. And you get that 
when you get good legal advice.”

Speaking on the phone from Newcastle, Painter is feeling badly stung. The 
judge in his second hearing made a finding of fact that, on the balance of 
probabilities, he had been violent to his ex. As the hearing had got under way, 
the judge had explained that it might be in his best interests not to contest 
the non-molestation order. Should he do so, she explained, those findings of 
fact might come back to bite him in later hearings to determine contact with 
his children.

Angry and indignant, Painter chose to press ahead. It didn’t turn out well. 
“The judge believed everything my ex said. I’m absolutely devastated.” He 
sounds utterly downcast. “Her brief, the way she picked out points in my 
statement… If I’d had a lawyer, it could have been different. I think they 
would have put my points over a bit better. And in the end, it’s the children’s 
welfare at stake. I feel like I’ve made a mess of it.”

Whatever the rights and wrongs, Painter’s emotionally charged decision to 
challenge the order may affect his and his children’s lives for years to come. 
If a lawyer had been there to advise him, who knows if the outcome would have 
been different?

• Names and some family details have been changed to protect the identities of 
the children involved.
