
Until January 2010 the worst injury I’d had was a broken nose. I played rugby 
at county level and things like that were par for the course. So when Mum told 
me, “Please be safe out there” over breakfast on the morning my two best 
friends and I left for our ski holiday, I smiled and rolled my eyes.

We were off to the French resort of Val d’Isère on a student trip, and I’d 
arranged to share a room with Johnny and Charlie. The week flew by – we partied 
every night and skied hard every day, catching the first lift each morning and 
the last one back. I’ve skied since I was 11, and have spent a season on the 
slopes, so I was confident, finding small jumps and powder to ride through.

On our final day, we decided to seek out a small restaurant that we’d heard 
served the best hot chocolate on the mountain. To get there we had to ski an 
easy blue run; we were happy to relax after a hectic week.

I was following the guys, and at the halfway point I approached a bend where 
they were waiting. I must have caught an edge because suddenly, instead of 
heading around the piste, I careered straight through it. My skis flew off and 
I shot past my friends. They watched me go over the edge. 

I remember only three tumbles, and then the feeling of falling. When I woke up 
on the rocks at the bottom of the 80ft drop, I had the strangest feeling of 
having just watched myself fall.

The boys clambered down and ran through deep snow to get to me. As soon as 
they saw how serious it was, they switched from being my silly, fun friends 
into being the most reliable and amazing people. They built a barrier of snow 
so I couldn’t move, kept my helmet on, made a neck brace out of their gloves, 
kept me warm, and phoned mountain rescue. I later found out my left hip had 
separated from my pelvis, gone up into my abdomen and punctured my kidney; my 
pelvis had snapped from the base of the spine, tearing my bowels; I’d broken 
four ribs, two of which had punctured my lung; and I’d broken my back in two 
places.  

Soon there were 10 people around me. The helicopter eventually came to pull me 
out of there and take me to hospital in Grenoble. Flights out of the UK were 
grounded that week due to heavy snow, so my parents drove for 17 hours from 
Norfolk to find me. Dad’s a tough bloke, a farmer, but he wasn’t prepared for 
what he saw. My entire body was black with bruises, and I was completely 
swollen with blood. Even my testicles had ballooned to the size of oranges. The 
doctors told my parents to prepare for the worst as I went into surgery.

There were complications during the second operation on my pelvis. I died 
twice while under the anaesthetic, apparently. After my spinal operation I felt 
the worst pain of my life. I was strapped to a bed, unable to do anything and 
I felt it was too much for me. I told my mum I wanted her to end it. I’m really 
ashamed to admit that now. 

I spent the next three months in the same hospital bed, lying still, staring 
at the ceiling. Eventually I realised I had two options: give up or get on with 
it. I concentrated on little goals, like getting my stitches out, being 
repatriated back to King’s Lynn, sitting up for the first time, first steps. My 
friends and family rallied around me and kept me sane.

By May, four months after the accident, I resembled a normal human again. I 
went back to university for the last six weeks of term – not to work, just to 
see my friends. I remember getting up from a chair and walking three steps 
without any help, and all my friends cheering. Normal life was returning. In 
fact, that summer I was back working on the family farm.

Related: Experience: I woke up blind twice a month for a year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/06/experience-woke-up-blind-every-two-weeks>

I like the person I’ve become after the accident: I take things more slowly, 
and don’t really let anything get under my skin. The accident often comes up in 
conversation. I’m asked if I play any sports, and now say, “Yeah, I surf, play 
a bit of golf, ski, and I used to play a lot of rugby.” When they ask why I 
stopped, I say, “Well, I fell off a cliff…” It usually gets a good reaction. I 
still see Charlie and Johnny all the time. I owe them everything, especially 
that hot chocolate we never got to taste.

• As told to Chris Sayer

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com <>
