
Nice pile! Mind if I look – no, you carry on splitting while I look at it. 
Bark side down? Hmm. Not a criticism, just if you don’t have a proper shelter – 
see, your top layers are damp. If we were in Norway, I’d be right with you, 
with the snow, but in Sydenham – shall I get my moisture meter? Well, if you 
start turning them now, it should be seasoned for next winter. You know to 
check for radial cracks?

All birch logs, are they? Hmm. I wouldn’t, to be honest, not that it’s not a 
great hardwood, just you don’t get the length of burn you do with seasoned ash, 
oak when we can get it. I calculated we get through only one and a half a cubic 
feet a day, which at £175 a tonne means we’re still paying £125.14 a year less 
than before – that’s with no more than 21 trips a day to the pile and one and a 
half hours splitting logs. Not bad, eh?

Well, mustn’t keep you, looks like you’re struggling there. You know what that 
new book says: you can tell what a man’s like from the way he chops wood – 
amazing what you learn when you get a stove. Do you riddle? Controversial. What 
stove have you got? Just 4kw? With your logs, I’d keep an eye on the flue, for 
maximum draw. We imported this quite rare Norwegian appliance, 12kw, my rule of 
thumb is approximately 1kw per 14 cubic metres – depends on the insulation, 
obviously. Yours must be amazing.

Related: Modern tribes: the lactivist MP 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/21/lactivism-mp-modern-tribes-breastfeeding-catherine-bennett>

Anyway, you can always throw on another jumper, am I right? My wife says she’s 
never been so cold in her life. I used to tell her, so why don’t you help with 
the bloody splitting once in a bloody while, but since she chopped her thumb 
off, forget it. OK, back to my pile. You know what the Finns say: wood warms 
you twice, once from cutting the wood and once from burning it. If anything, it 
can get too hot, what with the central heating, but at least we’re doing our 
bit for the environment, right?
