
In the past, young people who wanted a career in social care either completed 
an apprenticeship or diploma, or more recently studied for an undergraduate or 
postgraduate degree in social work, which entitled them to practice.

An apprenticeship continues to be a popular option: in 2013-14, more than 
70,000 people began one in health or social care and another 60,840 started a 
scheme in the first nine months of 2014-15, according to latest government 
figures.

While universities will still train most of the next generation of social 
workers, another route into the profession for young graduates is emerging – 
and growing. This autumn saw the launch of the latest fast-track graduate 
programme when applications opened for Think Ahead, which aims to create 
specialist mental health social workers. There were more than 2,500 registered 
expressions of interest before applicants were invited to apply.

Related: Child protection is tough, but some moments make it all worthwhile 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/sep/30/child-protection-social-work-parents>

There are fears that these new schemes, which are attracting candidates with 
non-vocational degrees from the top universities, are creating a two-tier elite 
workforce. Other commentators say that the schemes are helping to raise the 
profile of social work and bringing in high-flyers who may have gone into other 
professions. Here, we compare what the different schemes offer:

Frontline

Number of places: 180. 
Qualifications needed: 2:1 first degree; grade C GCSE maths and English; 
minimum 300 UCAS points.
Length of course: Two years.

How many local authorities/providers involved: Unspecified for 2016, but 
promises to be more than this year’s 19 in Greater London and Greater 
Manchester, with plans to expand into the north-east.

Bursary/pay: First-year bursary £19,600 (plus London weighting); in second 
year, newly-qualified social worker salary of around £24,000 outside London, up 
to £30,000 in London.

Qualifications: Postgraduate diploma in social work (year one); master’s in 
social work (year two). Tuition fees paid.

Job guarantee: No guarantee, but a graduate would be a highly attractive 
candidate for a permanent post with host authority

Step up to Social Work

Number of places: 500. 
Qualifications needed: 2:1 first degree or 2:2 honours degree plus a higher 
degree. C grades in GCSE English and maths.
Length of course: 14 months. 

How many local authorities/providers involved: 103. 

Bursary: £19,833.

Qualification: Postgraduate diploma in social work. Tuition fees paid.

Job guarantee: No guarantee. Decision left up to local authority. 

Think Ahead

Number of places: up to 100.
Qualifications needed: 2:1 undergraduate degree; Cs in GCSE maths and English 
language.
Length of course: two years. 

How many local authorities/providers involved: Unspecified, but NHS trusts and 
local authority employers will be in London, the south-east and the Midlands. 
Others being lined up in Yorkshire and the north-east.

Bursary/pay: First-year training bursary is provisionally £19,000 outside 
London or £22,000 in London; in second year, newly qualified social worker 
salary £21,500 outside London or £25,000.

Related: Inside the scheme that converts school dropouts to social care workers
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/careers/2015/sep/29/inside-the-scheme-that-converts-school-dropouts-to-social-workers>

Qualifications: Postgraduate diploma in social work (year one); master’s in 
social work (year two). Tuition fees paid.

Job guarantee: No. A second year graduate is employed on a one-year, 
fixed-term contract, but the prestige of the course and qualifications are 
likely to make graduates attractive candidates.

National graduate management training programme (Skills for Care) 
Number of places: 20.
Qualifications needed: minimum 2:2.
Length of course 12 months.

How many local authorities/providers: 81 involved since the scheme was 
launched so far, but up to 150 have expressed an interest in becoming involved 
in the future.

Bursary: £18,000.

Qualification: Institute in Leadership and Management level 4.

Job guarantee: No, but 75% of graduates secure a role with their host 
organisation and more than 90% stay in sector.

 * This article was amended on 15 October 2015 to correct the name of the 
graduate programme Think Ahead. It had been written as Look Ahead. This has now 
been corrected. 