
The government’s sizing up of Channel 4 for privatisation, revealed last month 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/24/government-considering-channel-4-privatisation-document-slip-up-reveals>
, comes almost 20 years after the broadcaster’s public ownership was last up 
for serious debate.

But in 1996, when John Major’s government was tempted to sell what seemed to 
be one of the few ripe plums left after the Thatcher years, he met with stern 
opposition from an ally.

Researching the history of Channel 4 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> for the 25th anniversary in 2007, I 
coaxed a detailed account of the exchanges from former chairman, Sir Michael 
Bishop. “As far as privatisation was concerned, we canned it,” he recalled.

The key document was a “Dear John” letter Bishop drafted to the prime minister 
while on a transatlantic flight.

He wrote: “The unassailable track record of privatisation to date is that the 
standards or quality of products or services dramatically improved. That is a 
key test ... it is only too clear what happens when conventional shareholder 
pressures are applied to the TV industry. Quality and choice are diminished.

“For Channel 4, with new shareholders seeking to maximise profits, money for 
dividends would have to be taken directly from the screen at viewers’ expense, 
by diverting programme expenditure.”

Bishop was facing down a very real threat. In June 1996 an indicative vote in 
cabinet to explore the broadcaster’s privatisation was passed 13 to one. It 
transpired there was a £500m shortfall in privatisation receipts for 1996/7. In 
tandem with Michael Grade, chief executive, Bishop believed privatisation was a 
whisker away.

Bishop was a grey-haired Conservative businessman who made a fortune with 
British Midland Airways, challenging British Airways’ effective monopoly. He 
even shared a platform with Major extolling the benefits of the Conservative 
privatisation policy. But in the case of Channel 4, he said it was a perverse 
move.

He argued that the broadcaster had never needed financial support from the 
government. “It would be particularly unpalatable if the excellence of British 
public service broadcasting, exemplified by the channel, recognised worldwide, 
has to be held to ransom for the short term expedient of fundraising for other 
purposes”.

He also hinted at the strong support from within the Conservative party for 
the broadcaster it had set up. “I believe such a philistine approach towards an 
organisation that has contributed so much in bringing the arts, music, 
education, film and current affairs to a vast new public audience at no cost to 
the public purse would elicit widespread condemnation … right across the 
political spectrum.”

Related: A Channel 4 sell-off wouldn’t really be about the money  
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/04/channel-4-sell-off-debt-buyers> 

Sir George Russell, chairman of then regulator the Independent Television 
Commission, also weighed in, raising the same issues of the channel’s remit 
that are central to debates today: “If privatised, Channel 4 could break away 
from, or gradually but significantly erode, the statutory programme remit. It 
could go populist.

“Over many years it has been my experience that when broadcasting and 
commercial considerations come into conflict it is the broadcasting side that 
loses out. Serious damage can be caused very quickly. Recovery takes years.”

Then, as now, Channel 4 was far from perfect and there was talk of a billion 
pound windfall from its sale. But the threat passed due to the strength of the 
challenge led by Bishop, because the Conservatives were on the way out and Tony 
Blair pledged not to jeopardise the broadcaster.

Despite his successful defence of the broadcaster’s public status, Bishop did 
not have his position renewed by the incoming Labour government, eventually 
selling his airline and becoming, in 2011, a Tory peer.

The Conservatives are in a very different position from two decades ago, with 
a fresh majority and divided opposition. But chancellor George Osborne still 
has to ponder the broader issue that Bishop’s effective opposition was based 
on; while he has every right to review its ownership, how would any change to 
Channel 4 benefit viewers?
