
Committed to beautiful design, user-friendly technology and an eco-friendly 
future, Renault is celebrating its all-electric ZOE with a campaign exploring 
innovations that create positive environmental change.

Related: Renault ZOE: the all-electric vehicle at a supermini price tag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/2016/may/19/renault-zoe-the-all-electric-vehicle-at-a-supermini-price-tag>

The ZOE is powered by advanced electric vehicle engineering, with more than 60 
patents filed over the course of its design. With the look of a coupé on the 
outside, the interior is inspired by natural settings – the only exception 
being its dashboard, which is designed to look like a wind turbine blade, 
giving a nod to renewable energy.


As part of its campaign to celebrate the ZOE, Renault has taken the role as 
official car partner of the 2016 Eden Sessions, a series of annual live music 
events held at Cornwall’s Eden Project. Embracing the ethos of the venue, the 
Eden Sessions encourage concertgoers to think about reducing their 
environmental impact, with all profits going towards the Eden Project’s 
educational charity and programmes. This year, Manic Street Preachers will 
headline an Eden Session on Saturday 9 July, and there are five pairs of 
tickets up for grabs.


In keeping with the creative spirit, Renault is collaborating with Central 
Saint Martins 
<http://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/2016/may/19/robotic-hammocks-and-mobile-gyms-the-future-of-car-interiors>
 (CSM) on a design project that invites students to contribute their ideas to 
the future of personal transport. The students will focus on the interior 
ergonomics of cars, and how they will change as autonomous vehicles become the 
norm. Renault is also headline sponsor ofClerkenwell Design Week 
<http://www.theguardian.com/renault-on-road-revolution/2016/may/24/renault-and-clerkenwell-design-week-a-creative-partnership>
 (CDW), where east London’s design community plays host to a festival of 
international and local talent. Hundreds of new products will launch at CDW, 
from home accessories to investment pieces – and there will also be 
opportunities to test drive the ZOE on-site.


For your chance to win tickets to see Manic Street Preachers headline Eden 
Session on 9 July, simply enter your details below.


Terms and conditions

 * The Eden Sessions Ticket prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents 
of the UK aged 18 and over. 
 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize 
Draw. 
 * Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Prize Draw you must enter your details as above. No purchase 
is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in 
connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at
competitions.glabs@theguardian.com <mailto:competitions.glabs@theguardian.com> 
with “Eden Sessions Ticket prize draw” in the subject line. 
 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winners shall be the 
owners of the email addresses from which the selected winning entries are sent. 
 * GNM and Renault UK Limited accept no responsibility for entries that are 
lost, delayed, misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for 
any technical or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of 
receipt by GNM. 
 *  The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 16 June 2016. Entries received outside 
this time period will not be considered. 
 * There will be 5 winners who will receive 2 tickets each to see Manic Street 
Preachers on Saturday 9 July 2016 courtesy of Renault UK Limited. The prize 
excludes meals and drinks unless stated, excursions, attractions, treatments, 
car hire, travel, visas and personal expenses and anything not expressly 
included in the prize, expenses and anything not expressly included in the 
prize. Only one winner per household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any 
costs associated with the prize that are not expressly included in the prize.

 *  The winners will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries 
received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take 
place on or after 17 June 2016. 
 *  The winners will be notified by phone or email on or after 17 June 2016 
and given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to 
GNM within 7 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with 
the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to 
notification of their win within 7 days or else they will also forfeit their 
prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of 
these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to 
select another winner. Any amendments made by the winners after the Prize has 
been confirmed may be subject to an administration charge and some amendments 
may not be possible. In the event of cancellation, the winner and their guest 
will not be entitled to a replacement prize or cash alternative.

 *  The prize will be sent to the winners in the week commencing 27 June 2016. 
 * The name and county of the winners can be obtained after 2 July 2016 by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian 
Creative, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. 
 *  The prizes are non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for 
cash or any other prize. 
 *  GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize 
of similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. 
 *  The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related 
to the Prize Draw and the winners shall participate in such activity on the 
reasonable request of Renault UK Limited. The winners consent to the use by 
Renault UK Limited and its related companies, both before and after the closing 
date of the Prize Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, 
photograph and name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still 
photographs and films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by 
the Promoter and its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or 
promotional material without additional compensation or prior notice and, in 
entering the Prize Draw, all entrants consent to the same. 
 * The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply 
to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. 
 *  GNM and Renault UK Limited accept no responsibility for any damage, loss, 
liabilities, injury or disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result 
of entering the Prize Draw or accepting the prize. GNM and Renault UK Limited 
further disclaim liability for any injury or damage to your or any other 
person’s computer relating to or resulting from participation in or downloading 
any materials in connection with the Prize Draw. Nothing in these Terms and 
Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent 
misrepresentation, or for death or personal injury resulting from its 
negligence. 
 *  GNM or Renault UK Limited reserve the right at any time and from time to 
time to modify or discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with 
or without prior notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control 
(including, without limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual 
fraud). The decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final 
and no correspondence will be entered into. 
 * GNM or Renault UK Limited shall not be liable for any failure to comply 
with its obligations relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by 
something outside its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but 
not be limited to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, 
industrial dispute, war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, 
inevitable accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances 
amounting to force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU. 