
An expected £6m fall in Labour’s annual income as a result of legal changes 
being proposed by theConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> will make it impossible for 
the party to maintain its current structure, staffing or offices, a 
confidential party document released to the Guardian reveals.

The document calculates the party is expecting to lose as much as £6m in trade 
union funding as a result of the changes to the political levy being introduced 
in the trade union bill due to be debated in the House of Lords on Monday. The 
figure is the first internal party estimate of the impact of the bill on the 
party’s finances. It is in addition to separatecuts to so-called Short money – 
public funding received by opposition parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/spending-review-2015-small-print-tax-credit-cuts-student-loans>
 – that were included in the chancellor’s spending review in November.

Related: This trade union bill will undermine our fundamental human right to 
protest | Vince Cable and Frances O’Grady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/10/trade-union-bill-undermine-human-right-protest>

The paper says the unions provide 20% of the party’s core funding and the 
consequences of the legal changes will be huge. It reads: “The party could not 
absorb a loss of £5-6 m and maintain its current structure. With an annual 
salary cost in excess of over 50% of total costs, it is clear that current 
staffing levels could not be sustained. In addition to a staffing review, all 
contracts would need to be challenged to remove any discretionary costs and 
offices considered for sale or sublet.”

The legal changes being introduced by the Conservatives have been condemned as 
the most unfair alterations to political parties’ funding since the second 
world war. They mark an end to a long-standing convention that issues of party 
funding are agreed on a cross-party basis.

The change will mean a cut in income to the party from the unions of at least 
£35m across a five-year parliament. The loss of income will come in both annual 
union affiliation fees and grants. The bill is due to become law in the summer 
and is already forcing the party to make contingency plans including the 
possible sale of property.

The trade union bill changes the way trade unionists pay into their union 
political fund, the only source from which unions can give money toLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>. The changes mean each union 
member will have to agree in writing every five years to opt into paying the 
political levy, as opposed to opting out via the current system. The new rules 
will apply to all existing 4 million political levy payers in unions affiliated 
to the party and those that are not. The bill gives the unions only three 
months to get a union member’s signature assenting to the payment of the levy.
​Trade union funding​, affiliation and other donations 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/labour_funding/giv-27167T7PhSQqlQzAy/>
Lord Collins, a former Labour general secretary involved in the fight against 
the changes, said: “These changes are entirely partisan, unfair and going to 
hit the income of the party and union political funds very hard. No balancing 
measure is being taken to cap the donations of the Conservative party.”

He said the changes were far more significant than the 20% cut in Short money 
that will cost the party an additional £1.3m annually.

The paper calculates the number of trade unionists paying the political levy, 
and hence the size of union political funds, will collapse from this autumn.

Although there are 14 unions affiliated to Labour, a huge bulk of the funding 
comes from five unions that together in 2014 affiliated 2,032,297 political 
levy paying members who provide the party with £5.554m in annual income. In 
addition, unions draw on their political funds to provide one-off donations to 
the party mainly at election times, amounting to about £12m. The unions provide 
on average about a third of Labour’s funding over the course of the parliament.

Related: This sinister trade union bill is an assault on the rights of working 
people | Ellie Mae O’Hagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/16/trade-union-bill-civil-rights-working-people-industrial-relations>

 The confidential paper says it had been predicted that about 10% of union 
members would opt in, based on a review of the number of union members who did 
so in the 2010 party leadership election. This would mean the number of members 
paying the political levy in the five largest affiliated unions would fall from 
3.352 million to 333,000, thereby slashing the numbers that can be affiliated 
to the party. Unions cannot afford to affiliate every political levy payer 
since they need to retain funds for other political activities and one-off 
donations. On one estimate, annual income from affiliation fees would fall from 
£5.5m to £1m.

 The trade union and Labour party liaison organisation claims the Conservative 
party “will establish an overwhelming financial dominance over the Labour 
party, making British elections uncompetitive”.

The government says the switch to opting in ensures unions only receive 
political funds from members who actively want to be engaged in politics.



In the year ending December 2013, the last date for which official figures are 
available, the total number of union members paying a political levy was 
4,954,606. But the number paying it in unions affiliated to Labour was 3.7 
million, producing an annual income for the political fund in the affiliated 
unions of roughly £22m, an average payment of about £6 per political levy payer.

On the assumption that only 370,000 (10%) of political levy payers agree to 
pay the political levy within the three months proposed in the trade union 
bill, then the annual income to the political funds of affiliated unions would 
collapse to £2.2m. Not all of the £2.2m will go to the Labour party, since some 
is tied up in funds that cannot be spent on Labour.
