
Alexandra on Raffaele

What were you hoping for?
A creative, burly sailor type.

First impressions?
A confident, City banker type.

What did you talk about?
His Italian background, posh places (he prefers them), what we’d do in an 
apocalypse, our different tastes in comedy, his job selling meat, sausages, 
different flavoured sausages, and drunk lorry drivers. The chat was mostly 
about him but he made me laugh a lot.

Any awkward moments?
He kept looking at the waiter and commenting on his appearance. I found that 
odd.

Good table manners?
He was very polite; my cutlery etiquette is nonexistent.

Best thing about Raffaele?
His cockney-style accent.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
I doubt they’d have much to talk about, past a mutual appreciation for 
sausages.

Describe him in three words
Polite, chatty, enthusiastic.

What do you think he made of you?
He said he thought I was a deep thinker, which is true.

Did you go on somewhere?
We stayed to watch the ice-skaters for a bit but I had to get an early night, 
so no.

And… did you kiss?
Will a light, awkward hug at the end of the night do?

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
That I didn’t chicken out of ice-skating.

Marks out of 10?
6, he made me laugh a lot.

Would you meet again?
Not in a romantic scenario.

Raffaele on Alexandra

What were you hoping for?
I never have expectations. I’m very calm on a date.

First impressions?
She said she was nervous, but I didn’t get that impression.

What did you talk about?
Comedy, our jobs, ambitions, food, pubs, dancing, what living in Italy is like.

Any awkward moments?
None.

Good table manners?
Yes.

Best thing about Alexandra?
She was great to talk to, with a good sense of humour.

Would you introduce her to your friends?
Yes.

Describe her in three words
Funny, energetic, assured.

What do you think she made of you?
That I was really funny and easy to talk to.

Did you go on somewhere?
Alex had to get up early, so we didn’t go anywhere else.

And… did you kiss?
No.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I would not change a thing.

Marks out of 10?
9.

Would you meet again?
We’ll go skating for sure in the future.

• Alexandra and Raffaele ate at Fortnum’s Lodge 
<http://www.somersethouse.org.uk/ice-rink/fortnums-lodge> at Skate at Somerset 
House, London WC2

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com <>

For a free three-day trial, go to soulmates.theguardian.com 
<https://soulmates.theguardian.com/>
