
What this bed says about me


Ben’s parents bought him this bed on eBay and it’s in his room at their house 
in Wolverhampton. ‘I thought this bed would turn me into a confident underlord 
of sexuality, like Angel fromBuffy the Vampire Slayer,’ says Ben. ‘But it 
hasn’t changed me: I’m still an iPlayer and missionary kind of guy.’

And what it really says, by Miranda Sawyer


What a bed! A bed for a shiny-booted Perv King, a masterful, dastardly dark 
lord of the dildo who stands, muscled legs tensed and apart, possibly wearing a 
cape, to inform whoever he fancies that they’re under his command. And then 
there’s Ben.

Ben, with his daft shirt and beard, and even dafter grin, clearly has a sense 
of humour. And humour is not allowed in a Perv King. Sniggering is not sexy. 
You might think that when a PK whips out a vibrator that looks like a melted 
child’s toy – there will be one somewhere, under the paperbacks – that the 
correct response is to howl with laughter, but hilarity is not an option.

Neither is scruffiness – and let’s face it: this room could do with a tidy. 
Around the bed is the detritus of Ben’s everyday personality, determinedly 
encroaching upon his sex don fantasies. This is the room of a busy person 
who likes reading and listening to music and talking to friends about new 
things to get excited about, possibly while drunk. Not a man who stays in 
and strokes a whip gently across his recently waxed bum. At least not every 
night.

When you’re at home, living with your mum and dad, it can be hard to be sure 
who you are. You are surrounded by their tastes, their history, their choice in 
soft furnishings. Ben’s bed is an enormous attempt to assert himself which 
doesn’t really succeed. You can see the nice beige carpet underneath.

Of course the sexiest part of this picture is Ben himself. He is a stone fox, 
a big smiley bearded hunk, with an active interest in living. Loads of people 
will want to have to sex with him. Ben has no need for his mad bed. Although 
when I look at it, I think: “It’s huge! How does anyone fit that thing in!” 
Which may well be the reaction he was hoping for.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
