
There's great excitement at Windsor Hill Wood this week. A dream has finally 
come true: after a year of research and saving and all manner of snags, our new 
woodfuel boiler has finally been installed and commissioned. So now, as we 
slide towards winter, we can heat the house entirely through our own timber. 
And since all our electricity is 100% renewable (thanks to Good Energy), we are 
– but for the car and the chainsaw – inching towards the promised land of 
"carbon neutral".

I doubt I need to explain why we've long yearned to be free of gas or oil. It 
seems completely crazy to me to be managing a beautiful British woodland and 
yet to have to buy fuel from Russia or Saudi Arabia. There's a gentle 
patriotism, as well as convinced environmentalism, in the satisfaction we get 
from heating the house with a fuel that we have felled, cross-cut, split, 
stacked, stored, loaded and lit ourselves. And it will be even more satisfying 
in 10 or 15 years' time, when we can add "planted" to the beginning of that 
list.

Now I know that a woodfuel system isn't for everyone. If you've got a hopper 
full of wood pellets that are fed into the boiler automatically it's not too 
bad, but if you're using logs it's a lot of work. You'll have to load and light 
the boiler each morning and keep an eye on it through the day. And if, as we 
are, you're growing and felling your own fuel rather than just having logs 
delivered, you will face a hefty amount of labour. Some estimates suggest that 
during all those tasks I've just listed (the felling, cross-cutting, etc) 
you'll handle the wood eight or nine times at least. No need for a gym. We'll 
probably get through between 10 and 15 tonnes during the autumn and winter, so 
we're going to be swinging the axe even more than that berk George Osborne.

Add to that the fact that the whole caboodle takes up a lot of space: we've 
now got a dedicated boiler room the size of a small bedroom to house the 25kW 
Vigas boiler, the 1,500-litre accumulator tank and the expansion vessel. And 
although the boiler's great, it's not a beautiful black cast-iron stove with 
mullion-like windows through which you can watch the dancing flames. It's a 
large grey industrial box. And it's not, of course, cheap.

But we love it. The fact that some of us have sweated to make the radiators 
warm means that we're now much more careful about just whacking up the 
thermostat or about leaving doors and windows open. In fact, you quickly learn 
that the best way to get warm is actually to get outside and go and swing the 
axe again. Nor is the cost prohibitive: we got a 1,500-quid grant from the 
Energy Saving Trust, and the Renewable Heat Incentive will (allegedly) start up 
next year, which means that we'll earn a fixed income for every kilowatt hour 
of heat we produce, a bit like the electricity "feed-in tariffs". And above 
all, our fuel is free. All of which means that it should pay for itself within 
three or four years.

The whole thing has also got me thinking. I've often thought that the reason 
there's an epidemic of depression in contemporary life is that we all find it 
far too easy to survive: it's such a doddle to find food, to warm ourselves, to 
clothe ourselves. We live surrounded by incredible comfort and yet are 
completely removed from our primitive instincts. That, presumably, is why 
survivalism and post-apocalyptic fiction and films are so incredibly popular 
and why, I guess, there's an unprecedented craze for bushcraft: they all take 
us back to a simpler life that many of us secretly long for, a life in which we 
struggle for the basics and forget all the ephemera.

And that, for me, is the attraction of heating with wood: it takes us back to 
the basics of survival – to providing for ourselves. And, as a writer, it's 
great to produce another, much more literal and tangible, kind of hot air.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
