
The demand for state school places in England went up again this year, 
resulting in one in six children missing out on their first choice at secondary 
level, according toofficial figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/secondary-and-primary-school-applications-and-offers-2016>
 published on Tuesday.

Government statistics show that the number of applications for secondary school
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/16/squeeze-on-secondary-school-places-in-england-now-worse-than-for-primaries>
 places this year jumped by 2.8% on 2015, as the recent baby boom that has put 
pressure on primary school numbers in the past few years moves up to secondary.

As a result, the proportion of pupils who got their first choice of secondary 
school went down slightly this year – 84.1% of 11-year-olds received offers 
from their first school preference, down from 84.2% in 2015 – suggesting local 
authorities have worked hard to lay on extra places.

Government data shows the number of applications at secondary level was at its 
highest since 2008. As in previous years, pressure on places in London was 
particularly intense, with just half (52%) of children in Hammersmith and 
Fulham getting their first choice and the situation little better in 
Westminster (53.4%).

In other areas of the country, almost all children get their top choice, with 
98.7% of applicants in Northumberland receiving an offer from their favourite 
school, and 98.6% in central Bedfordshire.

The pressure on places in primary schools also continued to grow with the 
number of applications continuing to rise, though at a slower rate than in 
recent years. As a result almost one in eight children was disappointed and 
missed out on their preferred school.


In recent years, primary schools in areas of high population growth have been 
forced to expand rapidly 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/16/welcome-big-school-how-baby-boom-supersized-primaries>
, building extra classrooms and converting existing buildings to accommodate 
growing numbers.

Council leaders have previously warned that local authorities would struggle 
to create new secondary school places because of government policy restricting 
new schools to being academies or free schools. However, some local authorities 
have begun to expand their existing secondary schools, creating so called“titan 
schools” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/01/rush-titans-supersize-secondary-schools-surging-population>
, to cope with growing demand.

The government pointed out on Tuesday that 95% of parents in England had 
received an offer at one of their top three preferred secondary schools and 
96.3% at primary, with almost 20,000 more secondary pupils getting their first 
choice place compared with 2010.

The pressure on secondary schools looks set to grow further however. While 
there were 548,006 applications for places this year, demand for primary places 
is still rising and this year went up to 641,572, a 0.8% increase on last 
year’s figures.

At primary level more children are getting their first choice of school with 
88.4% of parents receiving an offer for their top preference, up on last year’s 
figure of 87.8%. However, in London again there was greater disappointment for 
parents, with 83.7% of applicants receiving an offer of a place at their first 
choice.

A Department for Education spokesperson said: “Delivering good quality school 
places is a top priority for this government and today’s figures show that the 
system continues to work. The vast majority of pupils were offered a place at 
their first choice school and more than 95% received offers from one of their 
top three choices.”

Responding to the figures, Labour’s shadow secretary of state for education, 
Lucy Powell, said there were legitimate concerns about the impact of migration 
on the schools system.

She added, however, that fewer than 5% of new places needed were for children 
of EU migrants. The majority of the pressure on places is coming from a rising 
UK birth rate and she said the Conservatives’ “free market approach” to 
providing new school places was not working.


“Children are being crammed into ever larger class sizes and many primary and 
secondary schools are at or over capacity. The provision of new places needs 
proper planning and co-ordination.

“Yet this government’s fixation with free schools, which can be opened where 
there is no shortage of school places, has made it harder and harder to ensure 
there are enough good school places in every local area.

“It is time for ministers to give local areas adequate powers to plan for new 
places and remove the bureaucracy that councils face when it comes to opening 
and expanding schools,” she added.

Roy Perry, the chairman of the Local Government Association’s children and 
young people board, warned that more than 800,000 extra school places would be 
needed by 2024. “While councils have a statutory duty to ensure every child has 
a school place available to them, they find themselves in the difficult 
position of not being able to ensure schools, including academies, expand.

“Finding suitable sponsors with the capacity to take on the running of a 
successful new school is also proving a challenge. Councils are therefore 
calling for powers to either compel academies to expand to provide enough 
places, or to create new schools if they are unable to secure high quality free 
school sponsors in their communities.”

Russell Hobby, the general secretary of the National Association of Head 
Teachers, expressed concern about the wide regional variations and said 
national figures did not reflect the reality in some communities.

“Under the government’s education plans, local authorities will have the 
responsibility for ensuring adequate school places, but will have no real 
powers or funding to do so. It must look again at these plans,” he said.
