
I am 24 years old and have been a mental health nurse in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> for four years. It may be a hot topic 
in the media at the moment but mental health is still seen as the ugly 
stepsister of healthcare. And why wouldn’t it be? Dealing with verbal and 
physical assault on a daily basis, while struggling with funding cuts and a 
real-terms pay cut, means mental health is not a particularly desirable 
specialisation to work in. My area – dementia – even less so.

But I do care. I devote my working life to people over 60 living with 
different types and stages of dementia, and I love it. I am a mental health 
nurse by trade and a deputy ward manager by title. I do not look after the 
lovely woman you might encounter on the bus who can’t remember where she’s 
going, or the pleasantly confused gentleman you see attending his 90th birthday 
party on an Alzheimer’s Society advert.

When someone you may not recognise tries to remove your clothes and wash you, 
it can trigger a fight or flight response

No, I deal with the ugly side of dementia. The side that leaves people 
confused, lost, crying, screaming, kicking, biting, psychotic, anxious, 
depressed and pleading with me to find their long-deceased mother; those 
labelled “challenging” by the care system. People like Steve*, a wonderful 
person whose dementia has left him lonely, incontinent and unable to function 
without 24-hour assistance. During my training I witnessed Steve, in 
frustration, bite a healthcare support worker’s arm until he drew blood.

Most patients become aggressive during personal care. It’s terrifying enough 
to live with dementia, in a world that does not share your view on reality, but 
when you have someone you may not recognise trying to remove your clothes and 
wash you, that can trigger a fight or flight response. Everyone I know in my 
field has been assaulted during personal care; sadly, we accept it as the norm.

The people I look after cannot really be cared for in a nursing or residential 
care home. The private sector doesn’t want them. So they are placed with me, on 
one of the few surviving NHS continuing care units in the country. One that is 
set to close.

Related: I wish I could do more to protect your loved ones in mental health 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/23/mental-health-crisis-hospital-bed-suicide>

“It’s not about money,” I’ve been told to say to distraught families of 
patients faced with finding a new place for their relatives to live. But how 
can I, when the official wording of the decision states: “[it] is to do with 
the costs incurred in running a stand-alone unit, and the desire … to move to a 
different model of care”.

Some of our staff are facing redundancy. The cooks and cleaners, provided by 
an outsourced agency, have no choice but to accept termination of employment. 
Others will be dispersed without much consent to other areas within mental 
health. Few will be able to stay with our residents – the ones deemed unwell 
enough to qualify for NHS dementia care; they will be moved to other hospitals, 
at least a two-hour drive away.


So where does that leave our other residents? There will be 1 million people 
with dementia by 2025 <https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/statistics>, and the 
health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, wants the UK to be theworld’s most 
dementia-friendly country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/06/uk-dementia-friendliest-country-jeremy-hunt>
. The 2014 Care Act promotes a “care in the community” approach to dealing with 
dementia, which means caring for people in their own homes to limit the number 
of costly inpatient admissions. But my patients’ children have jobs and 
families and are often unable to care for a confused, potentially aggressive, 
high-risk parent. They break down in tears in front of me, guilt-ridden because 
they are told to take care of their elderly relatives and cannot.

I will listen to families, I will say goodbye to patients I have nursed for 
four years, and I will go home and cry

One such daughter asked for my advice recently: should she move her mother to 
another inpatient unit much further away, or search for a local care home and 
pray it offers enough support? The majority of my patients will end up in 
largely underfunded, privately-run homes. I have visited most of these homes in 
the local area and I know the staff – though well-meaning, despite public 
belief – lack the specialist mental health and dementia training required to 
look after my patients. Few are specialist-built, and even even fewer can 
provide the space and stimulation a person with dementia requires to lead a 
fulfilling life.

I spend my free time researching homes in the local area for my patient’s 
daughter, but it’s a decision I honestly cannot make.

Without the specialist care offered by units such as mine, with access to 
psychiatrists, psychologists, physiotherapists and occupational therapists, 
people with dementia are essentially discarded. They are sedated with 
benzodiazepines and antihistamines to stop them wandering the hallways. They 
become bed-bound, due to a lack of appropriate therapies, or develop 
behavioural problems because they are bored and without proper stimulation 
(24/7 Bargain Hunt and Countdown just don’t cut it). They can end up being 
admitted to hospital or acute mental health wards – confusing and scary places 
for someone with dementia.

Related: I'm a bed manager in mental health – and the scapegoat of the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/14/bed-manager-mental-health-scapegoat-nhs>

As for me, I’ll be spending the next few months with very little sleep, 
worried about my clients and their families while I put in overtime to oversee 
the transition. I will listen to families, I will say goodbye to patients I 
have nursed for four years, and I will go home and cry.

I hope to get an Australian visa and join hundreds of other UK-trained 
healthcare professionals overseas where, perhaps, my specialist knowledge will 
be better put to use. After four years as a mental health nurse in the NHS, I’m 
done.

*Name has been changed

This series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
