
Nicola Sturgeon <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> has 
backed her predecessor, Alex Salmond, in his continuing spat with the former 
BBC political editor Nick Robinson, saying that her SNP colleague was not to 
blame for the dispute.

Salmond said this week that Robinson should be “ashamed” of his reporting 
during the Scottish referendum campaign, and his suggestion that he had not 
answered a question. Robinson, who is soon to start as a presenter onBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Radio 4’s Today programme, has defended 
himself, accusing Salmond of trying to “control the media”.

Related: 'A disgrace': BBC condemned by Alex Salmond for referendum coverage 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/24/a-disgrace-bbc-condemned-by-alex-salmond-for-referendum-coverage>

Sturgeon, in more conciliatory mood, denied such claims and, speaking about 
the political rally at which the two men first clashed, said: “I don’t think 
what happened there was Alex Salmond’s fault, but that’s by the by. That’s in 
the past. What I’m trying to do is set out rational explanation for way so many 
people feel so unhappy [about BBC coverage of the referendum].”

In a wide-ranging interview with the Guardian’s editor in chief, Katharine 
Viner, Sturgeon said: “Nick has reflected honestly on mistakes he made in his 
coverage of the referendum. I think Alex would agree with that. Let’s debate 
properly some of the issues. Let’s learn lessons, agree to disagree in some 
ways. And do that in a rational way.”

Delivering the alternative MacTaggart lecture at the Guardian Edinburgh 
international TV festival, Sturgeon spelled out her view that some BBC coverage 
during the referendum had been “partial or pejorative” either due to 
“oversight, ignorance or following the agenda of partisan print media”.


She accused the BBC of being led by predominantly anti-independence 
newspapers. Asked whether she would crack down on so-called “cybernats”, the 
abusive trolls who claimed to be SNP supporters, Sturgeon said abuse from all 
political parties should be stopped.

A BBC spokesperson said: “As we said at the time, we believe our coverage of 
the referendum was rigorously impartial and in line with our guidelines on 
fairness and impartiality.”
