
La, Casa de Sarah, Havana, Cuba


Good for a vintage house party
Sleeps 4-6
Cost €1,050 a week

In the 1930s, Santa Fe, nine miles west of Old Havana, was a fishing village 
and holiday spot for wealthy Habaneros. One family erected this simple wooden 
cottage here, with a wide veranda and a long garden overlooking the sea. 
Eighteen years ago when the current owner, Sarah, acquired it, it was in a 
state of near ruin. She painted it cream with racing green and added a jetty 
from the end of the garden that terminates in a thatch-topped platform with 
oversized bamboo furniture and hung with hammocks. It's within swimming 
distance of the restaurants at Marina Hemingway across the way.

The house is furnished with family heirlooms: vast bulbous wardrobes, ornate 
iron beds and antique dressing tables – but this is Cuba, so the house is run 
down. Don't expect Egyptian cotton, fancy toiletries and towels. The paint is 
chipped and fading; the garden paths are deteriorating from the lashing of 
hurricanes and the salty air. For the third bedroom, a curtain takes the place 
of a door, so the house may better suit two couples.

But this is magic for those who want a private-beach experience for a fraction 
of the price you'd pay elsewhere in the Caribbean – space, solitude and an 
original atmosphere. Sarah can organise social outings (nightclub openings, 
private parties), yacht excursions, jet skis, a concierge service, car hire and 
private chef
• Esencia Experiences (01481 714898, esenciaexperiences.com 
<http://www.esenciaexperiences.com/cuba-travel-ideas-luxury-cuban-holidays/cuba-villa-rentals.php>
)

The Calabash Cottage at Jake's Hotel, Jamaica 


Good for upmarket hippies
Sleeps 4
 Cost from £765 a week

This is an off-the-beaten-track hideout up a winding dirt road from one of 
Jamaica's best-loved boutique hotels. Situated amid flowering lignum vitae 
trees in the unassuming fishing village of Treasure Beach – whose dark sands 
and rolling surf defy the Caribbean cliche – Calabash Cottage overlooks the 
ocean and has plentiful outside space. Light pours in through huge windows on 
to recently refurbished Indian- and Moroccan-inspired interiors. A chef can be 
arranged, or the restaurants (including the Jack Sprat fishing shack) and spa 
of Jake's are at your disposal. Further afield there are wild rivers and 
waterfalls to explore.
 
• +1 876 965 3000, jakeshotel.com 
<http://www.jakeshotel.com/stay/villas/calabash-bay.html> 

Face à la Mer, St Barts

Good for family fly and flop
Sleeps 4 
Cost from £1,092 a week

This classic clapboard house on Lagoon beach overlooking Tortue Island exudes 
easy charm amid the glamour of Saint Barts. From the top floor you can lie in 
bed and gaze at gradations of turquoise. The cosy living space is simply and 
colourfully furnished so you don't have to worry about children wrecking it. 
The safe-swimming beach – on the lagoon of Grand Cul-de-Sac – is primed for 
watersports. Everything you need is on tap, from a barbecue to Wi-Fi, masks and 
fins to an outdoor shower, housekeeper, private parking and a canoe, beach 
chairs and umbrellas, and DVD player for movie nights. And the island's 
fine-dining scene is within walking distance.
 
• 0845 389 9582, oliverstravels.com/caribbean/st-barts/face-a-la-mer 
<http://www.oliverstravels.com/caribbean/st-barts/face-a-la-mer/>

Petit Bacaye Villas, Grenada

Good for unreconstructed Caribbean
Sleeps 2
 Cost from £745 a week

These five beach shacks with shaded verandas on a palm-fringed beach are 
perfect for couples wanting to go off-grid. There's an acre of tropical 
gardens, a tiny bird sanctuary across the water, and a sheltered, shaded and 
secluded beach. You can order Caribbean food to your veranda or buy the day's 
catch from fishermen on the beach – they also supply the restaurant with 
lobster, snapper, strawberry grouper and conch. A concierge can organise hikes, 
boats, plantation house visits and nutmeg-and-coconut-oil massages. The waters 
are calm, safe and made for snorkelling.
• +44 1794 323227, petitbacaye.com <http://www.petitbacaye.com/>

Villa Jarrow, Barbados

 Villa Jarrow, Barbados 
Good for Caribbean luxe on the cheap
Sleeps 6
 Cost from £854 a week

This charming three-bedroom Victorian villa is gingerbread-pretty and perfect 
for an extended family looking to experience classic Barbados without the high 
price. Skylights in the bedroom mean you can sleep under the moonlight. From 
the kitchen, deck and living space there are princely sea views – great for 
observing the rituals of island life, especially if you want to snaffle 
something for dinner from the fishermen. Half Moon Bay is packed with 
snorkelling, scuba and windsurfing centres, reef-protected and excellent for 
swimming.
• no phone, homeaway.co.uk <http://www.homeaway.co.uk/p200654>
