
My 13-year-old stepson has always been very insecure, unlike his 11-year-old 
sister. About four years ago, their mother met a man and they all went to live 
abroad. The boy did not want to go and would have preferred to stay with his 
dad, my partner. More recently, he told his mum that he has thoughts of 
self-harming. He also said a few months ago that he hated his mother and feared 
his dad could die suddenly.

Both kids adore their father, who is devoted to them (he calls regularly and 
visits twice a year). My partner is a very stable, calm, generous and loving 
feature in their lives and we have lived together for seven years. In contrast, 
the mother had a string of short-term relationships after she decided to 
terminate their marriage. For this man who she then barely knew, she left her 
stable job and removed the kids from their familiar environment.

My partner pays for all bills related to the children. She does not contribute 
at all towards these expenses. My partner and I find that he’s been taken 
advantage of but he feels powerless as he fears she may prevent him from seeing 
his kids if he does not comply with her financial demands. She once threatened 
to take him to court. In any case, there is no jurisdiction outside the UK for 
that, and the terms of their divorce state that both should contribute equally 
towards the children. Yet he keeps conceding to all her demands.

I resented immensely losing contact with them (I am childless, aged 53). I 
suppose deep down I wanted them to be mine.

I am encouraging my partner to have a word with his son and assess the 
situation, asking if he would like to live in the UK. I fear that if we accept 
the status quo, later on, once given the choice, the boy will come and live 
with us anyway but he could be more emotionally damaged. My partner, however, 
fears separating the siblings, who have always been very close.

Where do we go from here? 

Your original letter was very long and very loaded against the children’s 
mother. What I’m confused about is that you really only seem to want one of the 
children to come over and then, only by a certain age. It sounds as if the boy 
is already emotionally in turmoil and would be further damaged by being removed 
from his sister. What then? I think you have become so fixated with the status 
quo and what you don’t like about it, that you’ve not given due thought to what 
would happen if one or both children actually came over.

It is so easy to look at other people’s children and think you could do things 
in a better way, but remember that, however imperfect, your partner’s ex is the 
children’s mother and nothing in your letter led me to think she was abusing 
them in any way (obviously my advice would be different if she were).

I contacted Alison O’Mahony, a therapeutic practitioner (aft.org.uk 
<http://www.aft.org.uk/>) who specialises in stepfamilies and has vast 
experience in this field. “These divorces when the children are quite young are 
always difficult,” she says. “To have these ‘anti-ex’ campaigns is never 
helpful. It’s more about working with whatis rather than having a go.”

The pressure the children are being put under – to in effect choose – is not 
helpful

O’Mahony thinks that your partner “probably knows his ex better than anyone. 
He probably knows that if he goes head to head with her, he’ll end up with 
less.”

I would try very hard not to judge your ex-partner for this. It’s part of why 
you love him – he is putting the children first. Perhaps not in the way you 
think he should, however. Whatever arrangement they came to, your ex would have 
agreed to it (you didn’t mention a court order so I presume he did). The only 
way to bring one or both children here now would be with the agreement of the 
mother or via a court order in the country of residence.

O’Mahony feels that the pressure the children are being put under – to in 
effect choose – is not helpful: “A lot of research says that an acrimonious 
divorce is more damaging. What the children want is to be free to love both 
parents.”

Could you help facilitate that? We think that’s the way forward.

O’Mahony recommends: “Not speaking ill of the other parent – they are 50% 
their mother/father, so it knocks the self-esteem of the child. Try to take a 
step back and let go of the anger, which isn’t helping. Do you have another 
outlet for your outbursts? Sport/friends? If you can really try to understand 
your partner’s point of view, you have more chance of meeting him in the 
middle. What the children need most is a role model of a successful 
relationship.”

One of the most useful things you can do for children of divorce, O’Mahony 
says, “is to teach them critical thinking, eg, to analyse a situation, to think 
for themselves and look at what is true and where information (facts) comes 
from.” I think this is fantastic advice, but lots of adults don’t like children 
to think for themselves: it’s exposing.

Work backwards. What do you want to achieve? You say children should come 
first – brilliant. If you want to help in building these children up into 
multi-faceted, thinking-for-themselves adults you are in a great position to do 
so. Put your energies into that, and your relationship; not in making a case 
for them to leave their mother.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>

• This article was amended on 26 February 2016. An earlier version referred to 
the stepmother rather than the mother in Annalisa’s answer.
