
An increasing number of British students are opting to study abroad with some 
citing the attractive prospect of the benefits of living overseas, experiencing 
a different culture and working for international firms.

Studying overseas has become more popular, with half of those considering a 
university course in another country wishing to study at undergraduate level, a 
new survey by the British Council shows. A third of the students polled, aged 
between 16 and 30, said they were interested in some form of overseas study.

There has been a surge in interest of UK students in university courses that 
offer studying or working in a European country through the EU’s Erasmus 
programme, which has more than doubled in seven years, according to figures.

Recent Erasmus statistics show that during the 2013-14 academic year, nearly 
15,600 UK students spent up to a year in another European country through the 
initiative, up 115% since 2007.

Figures from Generation UK China, a campaign launched two years ago, show that 
the numbers of students going to the Asian country to study or work have grown 
from about 6,500 in 2013 to nearly 7,400 last year, the British Council said.


In a similar initiative launched for British students to gain experience in 
India this summer, the British Council received more than 2,500 applications 
for the initial 500 places.

ProfRebecca Hughes, director of education at the British Council, said the 
findings confirmed that a growing number of young people were recognising the 
value of gaining international experience.


“The UK needs graduates who have the skills and confidence to compete 
globally, and can compete against foreign talent that may speak more languages 
and have wider international experience,” Hughes said.

Zainab Malik, the author of the Broadening Horizons research based on a survey 
of almost 3,000 UK students, said the top perceived barriers to study abroad 
for UK students were costs and a lack of language skills.

However, Malik said students surveyed wafter studying overseas reported “those 
[language barrier] concerns were not as substantial as they initially had 
thought”.

“Their experience, coupled with accessible information, indicates that these 
barriers might be mitigated or even overcome,” she added.

UK universities have reported that during the 2013-14 academic year nearly 
30,000 students went abroad, up significantly from just over 18,000 the 
previous year.


The country students would most like to go to is the United States, followed 
by Australia, France, Germany and Canada, the findings show but 42% of those 
polled were interested in travelling to non-Anglophone nations.

Of those who said they were interested in overseas study, nearly 50% said that 
they wanted to have fun travelling and exploring different cultures, three in 
10 wanted to work for an international company and live overseas, while 15% 
said they wanted to go to the best university and get the best education 
available worldwide.


Nearly half of the students who were interested in overseas study said that 
the cost of UK university tuition played a role in their interest.

The study found that the biggest academic deterrent to studying abroad was a 
lack of foreign language skills – chosen by over half of those who were not 
interested or had not made a decision about studying overseas. While the top 
non-academic deterrent for students was the perceived cost.

Vivienne Stern, director of the UK Higher Education International Unit, said: 
“We need to better understand their motivations and what dissuades many others 
from taking advantage of opportunities,” in order to encourage more students to 
spend time abroad while at university.

More than half of UK employers were unhappy with UK graduates’ foreign 
language abilities, while nearly half were disappointed in graduates’ cultural 
awareness, according toa 2013 report by the CBI 
<http://www.cbi.org.uk/media/2119176/education_and_skills_survey_2013.pdf>, a 
business organisation .

The fresh figures on UK students continuing to look overseas to study comes at 
a time when plans for a referendum on Britain’s membership of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> accelerate. 
