
A teacher who read novels to 11-year-olds for several lessons in a row, showed 
clips from Jurassic Park and then rebuked pupils for asking questions – 
provoking them to complain of boredom – has been judged unfit to teach by a 
disciplinary hearing inScotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

Gillian Scott, a secondary school English teacher at Breadalbane Academy in 
Aberfeldy, Perthshire, was accused of failing to teach her pupils during 
lessons that involved them copying out the school rules or listening in 
silence, between 2010 and 2013.

Scotland’s General Teaching Council 
<http://www.gtcs.org.uk/fitness-to-teach/outcomes/hearings-schedule-and-decisions.aspx>
 heard that, in June 2011, Scott set the same task for pupils in classes across 
three different year groups, an essay entitled “What I did in activities week” 
and did the same again in September when she told them to write “What I did in 
my summer holidays”.

Even when Scott’s lessons were observed by her colleagues, little seems to 
have changed, such as the 2011 lesson in which one said: “There was no active 
learning by the pupils as you told the pupils about the characterisation during 
a clip of Jurassic Park and instructed them to write down the points you made.”

The council heard comments on Scott’s lessons that included: “Your lack of 
enthusiasm for teaching and the subject resulted in pupils becoming 
disinterested in participating in the lesson.”

In March 2013, a teacher reported that Scott told a pupil asking for 
assistance: “Put your hand down. If you ask again you’ll get a warning.”

Other teachers said Scott’s classes appeared to compensate for the lack of 
stimulation with rowdy behaviour, with one class of 13- and 14-year-olds “out 
of control on various occasions and pupils were shouting out, throwing objects 
and throwing chairs”.

At other times, the classes would amuse themselves with “inappropriate sexual 
graffiti” according to staff.

When confronted by colleagues over her lack of interest in her pupils, Scott 
is said to have replied: “Why would I want to get to know them? I am there to 
teach them English.”

David Macluskey, the school’s principal teacher of English, told the panel he 
was horrified by Scott’s teaching, saying that “the teaching was so low level 
that the whole class was bored”.

“Mr Macluskey said that his main impression of the respondent throughout the 
competence process was that she was unwilling to accept criticism; during some 
meetings, she had to be asked to stop shouting,” the panel was told.

When another teacher was brought in an attempt to offer coaching and advice, 
Scott “did not reply and gazed at her for quite lengthy periods without 
comment”.

Scott did not appear before the panel but was represented by her father and 
denied that she was unfit to teach. After considering her statements to the 
council, the panel concluded: “The respondent’s position appeared to be that 
there was nothing wrong with her teaching.”

But in an email to the council, Scott wrote: “With hindsight, I can identify 
situations that I could have handled differently, either in the classroom or 
with colleagues.”

The council concluded 
<http://www.gtcs.org.uk/nmsruntime/saveasdialog.aspx?lID=4926&sID=6245> that 
Scott’s “professional competence is currently falling significantly below the 
standard expected of a registered teacher” and she was unfit to teach.

• The subheading on this article was amended on 3 June 2016. An earlier 
version used the word “disinterested” where “uninterested” was meant.
