
Rollerskiing

The last time I went cross-country skiing, it was along the snowy trails of St 
Moritz, skirting a frozen lake. Now I can say I’ve been skiing on flat tarmac 
in a London park. In June. Needless to say, there was no snow.

I was rollerskiing – an alternative to cross-country skiing that began as a 
summer training technique in the 1950s, and is now a thriving sport in its own 
right. It involves short skis, about half a metre long with a small wheel at 
each end, plus ski poles. The experts at theLondon Cross-Country Ski Club 
<http://www.rollerski.co.uk/index.html> recommend that beginners have five 
lessons to build confidence, technique and stamina. I was trying to master the 
basics in a two-hour crash course – hopefully without too much crashing 
involved.

Falling over on skis is never fun, but at least on snow you have a relatively 
soft landing. Tarmac, on the other hand, hurts. This made me tense, wobbly and 
slow; while the other two beginners in my class immediately zoomed off, I 
barely moved. On the plus side, I had plenty of time to concentrate on the 
correct technique.

We shuffled about on grass to get the feel of the skis, then moved on to a 
path to practise “double poling” (keeping the skis parallel and using the poles 
to propel yourself along), “skating” (going from side to side, like 
ice-skating) and “classic” (a smooth forwards stride). Having watched Alison, 
my instructor, fly along skater-style with the grace of a gazelle, I could 
certainly see why the more complicated techniques were worth practising 
thoroughly.

We attracted the odd bit of attention – “Look! Skiers!” – but city parks are 
full of weird and wonderful workouts (Battersea has a lot of recumbent 
cyclists), and most people didn’t bat an eyelid. And rollerskiing is a workout, 
all right – it has the same benefits as Nordic skiing, which is about the most 
effective whole-body cardio exercise you can do. It helps with balance and is 
low-impact – unless you hit the deck – so it is suitable for older people. And 
you don’t have to be fit when you start; Alison recently taught a 25-stone man, 
starting with a programme of Nordic walking before building up to skiing.

Rollerskiing is perfect preparation for a ski trip, as the technique is 
directly transferable to snow, but many people enjoy it as a standalone sport. 
For beginners, the London XC Club runs lessons (£30) and courses (from £76) 
around London and south-east England; club members ski in Hyde Park and 
Victoria Park every week (from £29 a month). TheRoller Ski Directory 
<http://www.therollerskidirectory.org.uk/> list other clubs and locations 
around the UK. For competitive skiers, there is a race calendar; sprints, hill 
climbs, time trials, skiathlon.

For me, the only victory was staying on my feet – feet that, after two hours, 
were screaming for me to stop. But although I found it challenging, I had to 
admit it had been great fun, great exercise – and a whole lot cheaper than a 
skiing holiday.

Street golf

Think you haven’t got the time or money to play golf? Think again. Ahead of 
the 2016 Olympics (where it is included for the first time since 1904), the 
sport is adapting to attract new players. Take “cross golf”, AKA urban or 
street golf, a fun, fast, flexible, no-frills version of the traditional game, 
with fewer rules. It’s played on city streets or in parks, with a special ball 
that doesn’t damage people or property; perfect for a built-up environment.

Community Golf <http://communitygolf.net/>, a not-for-profit company, take 
cross golf to schools, universities, offices and local groups around the UK. As 
they point out: “Rory McIlroy used to chip balls into his mum’s washing machine 
at the age of nine, proving fun, practice and skill development can happen 
anywhere.” Last year, 2,243 people had a go across 28 sites. In May, Community 
Golf and urban golf pioneers the Shoreditch Golf Club staged the inaugural UK 
Cross Golf Open at Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in London.

If the weather doesn’t lend itself to outdoor golf, there are also plenty of 
indoor golf golf clubs-cum-bars to practise your swing. At theGolf Lounge 
<http://www.thegolflounge.co.uk/> in Glasgow, you can play on 50 of the world’s 
greatest golf courses via giant simulators, eat a pulled pork burger and drink 
a mint julep.Urban Golf <http://www.urbangolf.co.uk/> in London has three 
clubhouses (Soho, Smithfield and Kensington), 60 championship courses and lots 
of anti-rules. Sample: “Rule 35 – we operate a strict admissions policy. No 
stuck-up, snobby behaviour allowed on the premises. Just a damn good golfing 
time. For everyone.”

If even that sounds too traditional, urban crazy golf, such as Plonk 
<http://plonkgolf.co.uk/>, a pop-up course in a snooker club in Dalston, east 
London.XScape <http://www.xscape.co.uk/yorkshire/concessions/cosmic-golf> in 
Yorkshire hosts something known as 4D golf, the UK’s “first glow-in-the-dark 
cosmic adventure golf”, which is so whacky it operates in another dimension. 
It’s all a long way from St Andrews.

And the best of the rest ...




Free running
Free running, or parkour, evolved from military obstacle courses, and the aim 
is to move through your environment in a more dynamic way – why walk down 
stairs when you can vault off the rail? There are now dedicated parkour parks 
popping up across the UK so you can practise your moves.parkouruk.org 
<http://www.parkouruk.org/>

Urban MTB
Take the road more travelled and experience the adrenaline highs of downhill 
mountain biking. As numerous YouTube videos show, some of the world’s best 
courses are on city streets. To find out whether there’s a track or an upcoming 
event in your area, visit the website britishcycling.org.uk 
<https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/>

Wakeboarding
Mix waterskiing and surfing and what do you get? Spectacular wakeboarding. 
It’s not only confined to the coast; there are wake parks popping up in city 
docks where riders are towed by cable systems. The biggest UK competition takes 
place in Albert Dock, Liverpool, on 25 July.albertdock.com 
<http://www.albertdock.com/>

Rat race
Scramble and slide your way through a 10k course where obstacles are 
supersized, from monkey bars and tyre runs to 50ft water slides. The next race 
takes place outside London’s Excel Centre on 25 July when you can splash 
through the Thames to victory. londonriverratrace.com  
<http://www.londonriverratrace.com/>


Pétanque
The gloriously onomatopoeic pétanque (a form of boules that is usually played 
on hard dirt) has been growing in popularity since it made its way across the 
Channel, and you can probably find a friendly tournament in a city square or 
pub garden near you. For details visitpetanque.co.uk <http://petanque.co.uk/>


Hashing
What better way to finish your run than with a pint? Better still, why not run 
to the pub? A hash is a cross-country run with a difference – you begin at a 
pub and usually end at a pub. There are plenty to choose from, including 
inner-city runs (fancy dress optional). For more seehhh.org.uk 
<http://hhh.org.uk/>
