
I’ve screwed up with a vengeance. Matt, aged 10, stands before me upset at the 
idea of returning to school after his mother’s funeral. It’s not simply the 
fact of her death that’s the issue but his fear of the how other people will 
react if he has to tell them about it. My fault. A day after her funeral I 
thought it would help him to go back to cubs – he had enjoyed it so much. “Keep 
an eye on him please, he bottles things up,” I told Akela. In true scouting 
tradition she had prepared well in that she’d already told the other cubs and 
their parents, meaning no child should be too shocked at the news and they 
would have support if they were.

At the church hall in his badge-encrusted shirt and woggle, the task for the 
evening was arts and crafts, helped by parent volunteers who’d turn up on the 
night. “That’s lovely, you can take it home to show Mummy,” a helper said 
encouragingly about Matt’s multicoloured paper prism.

Matt wasn’t particularly put out; compared to the previous few days’ turmoil 
this was small fry. So he replied in a matter-of-fact, shrill 10-year-old 
voice: “I can’t show Mum tonight as it was her funeral yesterday.”

I don’t know precisely what the helper’s reaction was but I’d guess there must 
have been visible shock. So the fallout is that Matt realises that people who 
don’t know about Helen’s death will be shocked to find out and react 
accordingly. Their expressions have upset him, and that has made the prospect 
of going back to school abhorrent to him in a way it wasn’t before. Bugger.

It has also made me realise how much I am flying blind and making decisions 
whose unintended consequences could scar the children by amplifying the horror 
of what has happened. I wish there were a handbook for newly widowed blokes. 
There are excellent, frank books about bereavement byLindsay Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jun/12/biography.features> and Lucie 
Brownlee 
<http://www.thejournal.co.uk/culture/culture-news/north-east-author-lucie-brownlee-7387680>
. These help up to a point, but I am a bloke and carry with that a logistical 
disadvantage.

My competency, judgment and hands-on experience of the daily chaos was way 
behind Helen’s

My competency, judgment and hands-on experience of so much of the daily chaos 
was way behind Helen’s. I consider myself – and hopefully was seen – as 
feminist friendly but I worked full time and Helen worked part time. 
Inevitably, I never really understood the enormous amount of everyday detail 
needed to keep team Golightly functioning. I had thought myself a modern 
parent, sharing so much of Millie and Matt’s routine. I was brilliant at 
nappies and feeds that were biologically possible for me to give, and have 
always been there or thereabouts. And I would do all the usual blokey DIY, 
bins, recycling type stuff that we use to pretend hunter-gathering is alive and 
kicking.

Now I realise that as far as the kids and house were concerned, it was never 
really 50:50 but 70:30 on a good day – not least in terms of the head space it 
must have filled for Helen daily. What I need is a guide or a route map showing 
me how not to stuff up the logistics of recreating a version of day-to-day 
normality so we can sweat the small stuff again – the everyday mortar that held 
the walls of our lives together and even allowed us to normalise “mum’s cancer”.

With Matt calmed down and much happier, I try to work out where his games kit 
is and know that for the moment my ambitions have become pretty modest. That 
they go to school on time with the right gear and come home safely to someone 
in the house, where there’s tea to eat and homework to do so that for a moment, 
if you half close your eyes, it might be as if Helen is simply late home from 
work. It’ll be an illusion but one that might provide comfort, not least for me.

Later, sitting at 2am in front of the school website, I realise that I have 
none of Helen’s passwords to make sure the kids can buy school dinners when 
they return. Amid the sense of helplessness I wonder whether I should write a 
book, A Sad Dad’s Homemaker Guide to the Bleeding Obvious. Any takers?
