
George Osborne’s determination to cap housing benefit for social rented 
properties from April, including specialist housing, will prove a devastating 
and possibly fatal blow to care and supported housing services across the 
country.

Under the plans, due to take effect from 2018, housing benefit for social 
housing tenants would be capped at the same rate as local housing allowance, 
the benefit people in the private rented sector can claim, which is limited to 
the cheapest 30% of local private rents. The Department for Work and Pensions 
intends to apply the cap to housing benefit for tenants in supported and 
sheltered housing, despite the fact that rents in supported housing tend to be 
higher to reflect the extra facilities and resources involved. As a result, 
associations such as ours that provide housing for older people, people with 
disabilities and people with mental health needs could be left with huge 
shortfalls.

For us, the impact would be catastrophic. We would be left with no option but 
to close the majority of our care and support services, in the face of a total 
annual loss of £2.83m of rental income. We calculate that 24 of our supported 
housing schemes across the Sheffield city region would no longer be financially 
viable and would be at risk of closing.

At the moment, for instance, we provide 26 specialist homes in Rotherham for 
people who have previously been sectioned under theMental Health Act 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1983/20/contents>. The accommodation aids 
recovery by providing a community setting and reducing the need for extended 
hospital admission. The proposed cap would reduce weekly income by £44.10 a 
week. We would have to reduce staff and services, making the service unviable.

The National Housing Federation has taken an excellent position 
<http://www.housing.org.uk/latest-updates/impact-on-supported-of-capping-housing-benefit-to-local-housing-allowance/>
 on this. Its chief executive, David Orr, was one of the first to appreciate 
the substantial threat that this announcement presents, and has been unwavering 
in taking the argument to government.

On 27 January, in a Commons debate on the issue welfare reform minister Lord 
Freud said the government recognised the important work of housing providers to 
support some of the most vulnerable members of our society. “We are,” he said, 
“determined to ensure that providers who are delivering those vital services 
can continue to do so.”

Related: The benefit cap puts housing at risk for more than 400,000 vulnerable 
people | Sinéad Butters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/26/benefit-cap-supported-housing-risk-vulnerable-people>

This sounds unequivocal and is very welcome. So why are we, and many other 
housing providers, still so concerned? We are concerned that there is no real 
appreciation of the true nature of the problem.

Some senior government advisers, for instance, have said that associations 
should cross-subsidise losses incurred as a result of the benefit cap. This is 
nonsense. First, it would be ethically wrong for tenants with general needs to 
subsidise other customer groups; and second, it runs against everything 
associations are doingto provide more homes.

The DWP seems to think discretionary housing payments will fill the gap left 
by the benefits cap, but this is wholly inadequate. Housing associations like 
ours cannot build a business plan based on discretionary payments. I doubt if 
our regulator, theHomes and Communities Agency, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/homes-and-communities-agency> 
would regard that as fit-for-purpose risk management.

The DWP has also suggested that because the cap will not take effect until 
2018, we should not panic people at this stage. But closing services takes 
time. We would need to consult residents, relatives, local strategic 
authorities and commissioners, and we would need to identify alternative 
accommodation and support. When we have previously had to close servicesor 
consult about potentially doing so, it has taken years, not weeks, to do 
properly.

Some people think care and support providers should look for potential 
investors to step in, perhaps from within the sector. But no association 
interested in taking over providers of care and support will expect to come up 
with seven-figure sums to bail out these services. If anything, they would be 
likely to be more ruthless in closing services and cutting activities that are 
loss-making but important to our residents.

We now face anxious weeks and even months of uncertainty. The DWP has 
commissioned a review of the funding of care and support. That is 
understandable and we, and other providers, are engaging in this work.

But what we need now care and support to be exempted from these benefit caps 
so we are not forced into making decisions everyone will regret later.

Sign up for your free Guardian Housing network 
<http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network> newsletter with news and analysis 
sent direct to you every Friday. Follow us: @GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
