
My eldest son is 13 and becoming a confident, happy teenager. There is, 
though, one side of life that I can see him struggling with – girls. 

Suddenly all the girls he knows – in many cases, he has been at school with 
them since the age of five – have morphed overnight into scary, sexualised 
teenagers and he seems lost in terms of how to be around them.

On one occasion we were out together and he ran and hid when two girls from 
his school came into view a few hundred yards ahead. I spoke to him about it 
but he was so flustered that he couldn’t even articulate why. 

He has stopped talking to or socialising with some girls who have been firm 
friends of his for many years and I know (through his younger brother) that he 
is the subject of teasing about the way he flinches from some of these girls.

I remember only too well from my early teenage years how the girls around me 
suddenly seemed to have become a whole new species – and the scariest creatures 
on the planet.

We have been quite open about sex and relationships with him, so he is in 
possession of the physical facts but I would like to be able to ease his 
passage into this new world in a way that will help him to realise that girls 
are in the same boat as he is, not some alien species.

Or will I be muddying the waters and it’s something best left for him to 
discover by himself?

What a sensitive dad you are. I think that, although some of us remember what 
it’s like to be a teenager, it’s from the safety of adulthood.

It’s not uncommon for children to go from playing easily with members of the 
opposite sex to suddenly seeing the opposite sex as alien and scary. This is, 
of course, a shame, but it usually happens in early adolescence and things even 
out later on.

Philippa Boulter (childpsychotherapy.org.uk 
<http://www.childpsychotherapy.org.uk/>), a psychotherapist who works with 
children and adolescents, says that this is a “very ordinary [thing to happen] 
with this age group. He is on that continuum of normal, hitting his own 
sexuality. Girls mature more quickly and so initially seem scary to boys who 
take a while to catch up.

“There are also masses of hormonal changes going on at this age: their 
self-esteem is lower, they are more sensitive and there is a huge upsurge of 
sexual feelings.”

Boulter said it’s very likely everyone in his group feels the same – although 
they may be manifesting it differently.

The girls he usually hangs out with, have they grown up very fast in the past 
few months? They may seem unrecognisable to him.

It’s great that you have been very open about sex and relationships, but often 
(although some parents can dread it) the mechanics is the easy part to describe 
– what isn’t easy is the emotional/psychological side.

Teenagers also watch films in which other teenagers have unrealistic dialogue 
that is quick and winning. Real life isn’t like that, for any of us. Teenagers 
can feel very lacking. You ask what you can do and I think you already know 
that the best course of action is heavy on support, but light on intervention.

“It can be very hard for parents,” says Boulter, “to watch what was their baby 
entering a phase that is increasingly out of reach to the parents.”

Boulter suggests letting your son know that you’re there if he needs you, but 
not to intervene, “If he’s still really struggling in a year with his 
interaction with girls, you might need to look for some help for him, but until 
then you need to be there but let him find his own way.”

Empathy – rather than too much problem solving – is often what children want 
from their parents

Boulter did have a really good suggestion: “Do you have any photographs of 
yourself at that age? If so you could go through them with him. You can talk 
about what it was like for you at that age – that might help, without you 
making it directly about him.”

Remember that although you may remember what it was like, it is part of a 
teenager’s role to think that their parents don’t understand them. Also empathy 
– rather than too much problem solving – is often what children want from 
parents. So if your son does come to you, try to do reflective listening, where 
you listen attentively and reflect back what is said, rather than jumping in 
with solutions. A great phrase if you get stuck, however, is “How can I help?”, 
which leaves it entirely up to them.

(Another tip, on how not to do it, is to spend a bit of time, if they are 
still alive, with your own parents. Look out for all the things that they say 
that annoy you when you raise a problem and make sure you don’t take the same 
approach with your son.)

I wouldn’t force anything, such as introducing him to loads of girls, but do 
normalise any interaction with them and remind him that girls also go through a 
similar phase.

However confident these young women seem outwardly, it’s rare to find a 
teenager of either sex who doesn’t suffer from self-doubt.

Your problems solved

Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
