
A woman who was given a whole-life sentence for murdering three men and 
stabbing two others has lost her high court claim that she is entitled to 
damages for human rights violations after being placed in solitary confinement.

Serial killer Joanna Dennehy, 33, claimed that she had been left “tearful and 
upset” after being placed in segregation at HMP Bronzefield near Ashford, 
Surrey, after prison guards allegedly found a breakout plot in her diary.

Government lawyers have conceded the segregation period between 21 September 
2013 and 4 September 2015 was technically unlawful because it was not properly 
authorised by the former justice secretary Chris Grayling.


But Mr Justice Singh, sitting in London, ruled that her segregation since then 
had been “in accordance with law” and “at all material times it has been 
necessary and proportionate”.


Dennehy was given a whole-life term at the Old Bailey in February 2014 after 
admitting the murders of Lukasz Slaboszewski, 31, Kevin Lee, 48, and John 
Chapman, 56, whose bodies were found in ditches in and aroundPeterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/peterborough>, in 2013. 


She also pleaded guilty to two counts of attempted murder in Hereford and 
preventing the lawful and decent burial of her murder victims.


Dennehy, of Orton Goldhay, Peterborough, claimed at the high court that she 
has been “unfairly and unlawfully” held in segregation at HMP Bronzefield.


Hugh Southey QC argued at a hearing in March that her incarceration violated 
her human rights and had taken a heavy toll, leaving her “tearful and upset”. 
He added that at times she was resuming her practice of self-harming.


Southey described Dennehy as a “vulnerable” prisoner due to her history of 
severe personality disorders and episodes of self-harming dating back to 
childhood.


Government lawyers said the segregation was fair, justified and lawful due to 
the nature of Dennehy’s offending and the escape risk she poses.


They submitted there was also no procedural unfairness during her continued 
segregation after September 2014.


Ministry of Justice barrister Tom Weisselberg QC told the high court: “Dennehy 
was segregated because a credible escape plan involving her and two other 
prisoners had been uncovered.


“A written plan was located in her cell with detailed plans involving killing 
a female officer to obtain her keys and to utilise her fingerprints in order to 
deceive the biometric systems. She was placed on the escape list, which 
involved the wearing of an escape suit.”

Jenni Richards QC, appearing for HMP Bronzefield, described Dennehy as 
“arguably the most dangerous female prisoner in custody”.


Dennehy “got a taste for killing” and had admitted to the psychiatrist that 
she was “sadistic”.


Southey submitted there was unfairness because the escape allegations were 
never properly put to Dennehy at the time.


Dennehy had insisted that the alleged plot was nothing more than a “doodle” 
found in her diary, said Southey.


The police had investigated the claims and “confirmed that no further action 
would be taken”.


Dennehy is only the third woman to be given a whole-life prison term. Myra 
Hindley and Rose West are the other two.
