
Vice Media <http://www.theguardian.com/media/vice-media> has struck a 
non-exclusive deal to launch a TV channel on Sky in the UK and Ireland, its 
first channel launch in Europe.

It is the first deal Vice has signed since unveiling an ambitious expansion 
strategy to launch 12 TV channels across Europe over an 18-month period.

Last year, Vice founder and chief executive Shane Smith said that talks had 
been kicked off with a huge range of companies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/23/vice-plans-to-launch-12-tv-channels-across-europe>
from broadcasters such as BT, Virgin Media and Discovery, online players such 
as Netflix and mobile phone companies.

He described Sky as a “gold standard” partner on a level with existing deals 
such as HBO in the US.

The new channel, which will launch in September, will be branded Viceland and 
will run 24 hours a day on Sky and on Now TV.

“This is the biggest move yet in our long love affair with our British and 
Irish audience,” said Smith. “Viceland is going to give them a whole new way to 
experience Vice content – on their own televisions, around the clock.”

Rupert Murdoch’s Fox, which controls Sky with a 39% stake, holds a 5% stake in 
the Vice.

Smith said that choosing Sky had nothing to do with its shareholder 
relationship.

“None [of the deal] is driven by Fox,” he said. “We just look for the best 
partner everywhere we go. If a shareholder and a board member can help we’ll 
take help all day long. With this we went territory by territory and said who’s 
the best. Sky’s the best, let’s go.”

Vice is understood to have secured a slot high on Sky’s electronic programming 
guide, but neither party would reveal the exact positioning of the new channel.

The deal with Sky is non-exclusive and talks are continuing about potentially 
launching with other UK providers. It only includes Sky UK, not the other 
European markets – Germany and Italy – in which Sky also operates.

“The idea is to launch and be partners with Sky,” he said, “We are in advanced 
discussions in a lot of other European territories. I’m not saying we are not 
[in talks with Sky in Germany and Italy]. We wanted to get this one up and 
running as quickly as possible.”

Under the deal, Sky will get exclusive on-demand access to selected shows that 
will air on Viceland 24 hours before the first scheduled broadcast.

The channel will air programming entirely developed and produced by Vice, 
including its popular and sometimes controversial Vice News, as well as from 
outside producers.

Smith has previously said that the company had been secretly working on more 
than 30 TV series in preparation for its channel rollout across genres 
including food, travel, music, animation, unscripted and scripted.

“To date been doing everything in house,” he said. “For us we believe it 
drives a lot more value to have those production capabilities in house. Since 
then we have had outside directors, stars, writers and producers come. Next 
wave is going to be scripted. Some of which doing in-house, some of it will be 
out-of-house.”

Ahead of the launch of Viceland customers who have Sky Q, Sky’s new advanced 
set-top box, will be able to watch a range of VIce’s digital content including 
Vice.com, Vice News, Motherboard and Munchies, in the on-demand section in the 
coming weeks.

“Vice has become synonymous with fresh and original content which has huge 
appeal for younger audiences,” said Sky’s chief marketing, sales and digital 
officer, Stephen van Rooyen.

Vice, which is forecasting £100m revenues and £18m profits from its European 
operation this year, launched a US TV channel in the last few weeks.

The channel airs programming including Gaycation, with Ellen Page and Ian 
Daniel.
