
Barn and I are slowly getting a great little workshop up and running. We're 
using a garage by the greenhouse that was basically a storage space until Barn, 
a professional green woodworker who's living here for the foreseeable, arrived 
with a colossal amount of kit. The guy has 22 axes, which makes me feel like 
not much of a man. It's incredible to see the place now transformed: there are 
two pole lathes, a bowl lathe, a few axe blocks, some workbenches, a shave 
horse and some jigs and beetles (all traditional woodworking tools). It looks, 
to my eye, beautiful because everything here is hand-made rather than 
industrial. Instead of huge metal casings, you can see rough-hewn wood, 
beautiful bark, thick planks and cleft legs.

We spend a happy hour in the woods looking for the perfect pole for one of the 
lathes. Until now I have been using a bungee suspended from the rafters, but 
Barn is ideologically opposed to manufactured elasticity. We find a 20ft pole 
of ash, about two or three inches thick at the base, and feed it through one of 
paneless windows at the back of the garage. The end of the pole is attached by 
a nylon cord to a treadle on the floor and it has sufficient elasticity to 
spring up and down, rotating the object you're turning between two centres. The 
lathe is used for turning round, wooden objects such as bowls or chair-legs.

Like all green woodwork, the joy of it is the simplicity: no dust, no noise, 
no danger. You don't have to wear a mask or goggles or shoo out the kids. It's 
the kind of woodwork that promotes companionship because it's quiet and you can 
chat while you're working away. And that's the other great advantage: the end 
products are beautiful, but even more importantly the actual process of making 
them is beautiful. You're always in control: there's no reliance on huge 
machinery, just on yourself and a few tools. As you see ribbons of beige or 
ochre wood circling to the floor, it's hard not to be hypnotised and find 
yourself entering a blissful, calm, creative zone. For a place like this, where 
we hope people will both work and also find some serenity, that's a great side 
effect.

Another attraction is the beauty of the old equipment: the froe, the 
drawknife, the various adzes and axes. We're hoping to add a little forge in 
the corner of the workshop in the coming weeks so that we can do some very 
basic metalwork and create our own tools. But perhaps the real attraction of 
this kind of woodwork is that, since you need no electricity, you can actually 
do it in the woods. We'll be in this workshop over the winter, but once spring 
is here we'll string some kind of shelter between the trees and take everything 
outdoors.

Most green woodworkers never use sandpaper since it detracts from the 
originality of the artisan's craft. Why smooth everything down when the appeal 
is in the skill and uniqueness of the cut? It would be like toning down the 
colours of a great master to make everything grey. Some people use scrapers 
made out of old saws to take off a few rogue fibres, but someone who's skilled 
enough should be able to boss rogue fibres with his blade, not scrape them into 
submission. There are various degrees of compromise with modernity: some 
puritans might be appalled at the idea, but we use "tenoners" that fit on to 
the end of a power drill which really speeds up production.

I've always admired charities such as Emmaus which have a canny business plan 
rather than merely relying on donations. We don't know, as yet, how canny our 
plan is, but we're hoping to have a cottage industry selling the things we 
make: we're going to concentrate on chairs this winter, but are hoping to 
branch out into all sorts of products (bread boards, spoons, bowls, rattles, 
pots, stools, ladles, egg cups, boxes, goblets, rounders bats and so on). 
I quite like the idea of dividing any sales 50-50 between the charity and the 
guest who makes the product, so that not only does the charity benefit, but a 
guest might actually, when they leave, have some money in their back pocket.


To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
