
Are free schools being held to account if they fail to honour promises made to 
the Department for Education? The question arises after we investigated an 
application form submitted to the DfE by one high-profile institution.

Sir Isaac Newton sixth-form free school, a science and maths specialist 
college in Norwich, was opened in 2013 by the Inspiration Trust academy chain, 
with the DfE providing £6m for refurbishment of the site, which the school 
rents.

Its application form 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/392842/MS_174_W3_Sir_Isaac_Newton_Free_School.pdf>
 says: “We will work in partnership with a group of strategic business 
partners.” It then lists nine such organisations. We have contacted five of 
them, of which only one – the Hethel Engineering Centre – said it is a partner 
with Sir Isaac Newton. Two – the Norfolk and Norwich University hospital and 
Norwich Research Park – said they were not even aware of the application form.

Another, the John Innes (research) Centre (JIC), said: “There are no JIC 
corporate strategic partnerships with any school.” The last, the University of 
East Anglia, listed extensive links with the school, but said it was not a 
formal partner.

The application form also says: “The mathematics curriculum will be academic 
led, developed with and supported by Cambridge University, King’s College 
mathematics department.”

But Cambridge University said: “[Sir Isaac Newton] were obviously confused 
when they filled in their application form. Their association is through the
Cambridge Mathematics Education Project 
<http://www.maths.cam.ac.uk/about/community/cmep/>, a DfE-funded project based 
at the university’s centre for mathematical studies.” Neither the university 
nor King’s College, Cambridge, had been involved in writing the school’s 
curriculum, it said.

The form also says the school’s governing body would have two staff governors, 
two parent governors and “co-opted governors from strategic partners”. Yet it 
has never fulfilled that pledge: currently, it has at most one parent governor, 
no reference to strategic partners in its website governance information, and 
the only staff governor is Rachel de Souza, Inspiration Trust’s chief executive.

The application form predicted the school would have 440 pupils by 2014‑15. 
DfE data says that, as of January, it had only 173.

An Inspiration Trust spokesman said: “The application is not the end of the 
process but the start of it and was followed by many months of intense 
discussion and scrutiny by the Department for Education.

“It is the funding agreement [the contract with ministers] at the end of the 
process that sets out the formal basis for what a free school must deliver. We 
work with lots of local and national partners but those relationships are not 
stagnant. We are proud of [our students’] achievements.”

He added that Sir Isaac Newton had two governors who were parents at 
Inspiration Trust schools, and an advisory board with parents on it, and that 
pupil numbers were picking up.

The DfE did not want to comment.

Kent primary staff complaints vindicated 


Nine members of staff at a Kent primary school, who tabled a collective 
grievance against its former executive headteacher, feel vindicated after an 
official investigation found they were right to raise a string of serious 
concerns.

A Kent county council investigating team, brought in by governors at King’s 
Farm primary in Gravesend, reported that “serious concerns were found” in six 
aspects of the school’s work, including child safeguarding and health and 
safety; interactions with children; relationships with staff; and “destruction 
of documents”.

In three other areas, including in relation to special educational needs 
pupils, the investigating team reported that “concerns were found”, says a 
letter to one of the staff members from Mandy Cartwright, the chair of 
governors.

Executive headteacher Jane Porter left the school in July last year and the 
investigation related to the period up to that time. The school also featured 
in a Channel 4 Dispatches programme this month after having its Sats results 
annulled for maladministration last year. Porter remains the head of Whitehill 
primary school, also in Gravesend. Education Guardian called Whitehill but was 
told Porter did not want to comment.

King’s Farm seems to be improving: Kent county council has highlighted its new 
leadership under Catherine Taylor since September, and an Ofsted report in May 
said she was leading the school with “determination”.

Teachers wave goodbye to Norwich academy

Campaigners who opposed the enforced academisation of a school in Norwich, 
which featured inthis column 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/14/weyfield-headteacher-free-school-in-airport-building>
 in 2013‑14, may also be feeling vindicated after news arrived of a stream of 
teachers leaving. Some 10 staff, though not all of them teachers, at the 
260-pupil Edith Cavell academy will have left by the end of this academic year, 
its first under the control of the Rightforsuccess [sic] academy chain, the 
National Union of Teachers tells us. The school’s head, Simon Wakeman, and a 
deputy are among those departing, which means it will be without a permanent 
headteacher in September.

Rightforsuccess also runs two other primaries and a special school in Norwich, 
where it is based. The DfE has lined it up to take over a secondary in 
September, and another secondary’s governing body launched consultation on 
joining the chain last week.

Scott Lyons, the NUT’s joint secretary for Norfolk, said: “Rightforsuccess 
have come in [to Edith Cavell] and their background is in special needs 
education. They don’t have experience of running primary schools, let alone a 
high school.”

A source close to the school said: “The teachers who are leaving are 
excellent. There is a lot of frustration behind the scenes.”

Rightforsuccess said five members of the teaching staff were leaving this 
academic year, with some of this turnover being due to “overstaffing” in the 
predecessor school. It added that it strove to have a highly motivated and 
professional workforce, and evidence of its success in this area was that three 
teachers who were leaving were going to promotions.
