
Gordon Brown <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> would never 
forget what he was doing on the morning when the phone call came that would 
halt the downward trajectory of what remained of his public life. The news that 
Scotland had voted Yes had been broken to him gently early that day by Mr 
McDonald, the family odd-job man who lives in the converted coal-bunker at the 
foot of the garden.

“Damn and blast,” he said and hurled an arrow at the face of Peter Mandelson, 
smiling crookedly at him from the centre of the dartboard. “Will that be all, 
Mr Brown, sir?” asked McDonald as he retreated gingerly towards the door. “Not 
so fast, McDonald. Bring me my Raith Rovers match-day programmes – the 1994-95 
season, I think. A chiel needs to be with his football memorabilia at a time 
like this.”

He was just about to lift the phone and tear a strip off that fool Darling for 
getting him involved in the first place. Then he would phone Murray Foote, the 
wilyDaily Record editor who had proposed that wretched, bloody vow 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/oct/31/daily-record-scottish-independence>
. “It looks like you’ve drawn it up on the back of a packet of Kensitas Club,” 
he had protested. “It was a packet of Bennies, actually Gordon.”

But the phone began to ring before he’d had a chance to make the call.

On the other end was his worst nightmare.

“Hello Gordon, you old Unionist curmudgeon, it’s Alex here,” and Brown wanted 
to vomit. But Salmond’s next words almost made his knees buckle. “Gordon, I 
want you to lead our negotiating team when we go to the Treasury next week and 
make our case for currency union. I know you argued against it, but all’s fair 
in love and war and now your country needs you. Cameron, Osborne and that 
uppity colonial Carney, want to take our legs away before we can even walk. 
What do you say? Shall we discuss it over a couple of Salvadors at your Miners’ 
Welfare Club? Maybe you could arrange a wee lock-in for privacy and I’ll slip 
the barman a couple of monkeys. Let’s call it quantitative easing, eh Gordon.”

Brown could actually hear his heart beating in his chest. Of course, he’d 
advised againstcurrency union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/09/currency-union-independent-scotland-unworkable-bank-governor>
, but it was just a stick to beat the Nationalists with, and even Carney had 
told him in private that there was no reason why an independent Scotland 
couldn’t have the pound. “After all, you Brits allowed Thatcher to pay the 
miners off and pay down the deficit by falsifying all those oil receipts for 
decades, so I think you owe them one.” The Canadian was right of course, and 
Brown remembered erupting in fury when Osborne had fetched up in Edinburgh to 
tell the Scots the pound was English and let that be an end to it, like a 
medieval Saxon baron telling his tenants he had first call on their brides. The 
English had never in a million years expected a Yes vote and, faced with the 
reality of independence, they would simply have to cut a deal to avoid more 
uncertainty than was necessary in the money markets.

Brown could see it all now. Of course he’d have to swallow a bit of pride, but 
Murray at theRecord could knock up another wee statement along the lines of: 
“After a period of sober reflection, I have decided to accept Mr Salmond’s 
offer of trying to secure the best possible currency deal for my country and my 
fellow citizens. I am honoured to represent my country at this crucial time in 
our history.”

And he imagined he was Gordon Dalziel swooping to head home that crucial 
League Cup goal against Celtic.

Brown knew – all knew for God’s sake – that there was nothing to stop Scotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> declaring sterling to be its sole 
legal tender then borrowing it on the global markets to build up reserves.

And they’d be one of a family of nations which had adopted another state’s 
currency. Scotland was also in a far healthier position than many other nations 
with a fledgling currency. It had a quarter of Europe’s oil and gas, while 
whisky and tourism would also ensure a steady flow of sterling to Scotland, 
making it a net lender to England.

Indeed, come to think of it, what was stopping Scotland creating its own 
currency, pegged to sterling? There’d be no shortage of overseas investors in a 
new country with an educational hinterland, skilled and highly trained 
workforce and lucrative export markets.

An enlightened array of tax incentives would help of course. He could scarce 
forbear to dream: Gordon Brown, the governor of the new National Bank of 
Scotland.

Dear God in heaven, had it not turned out to be one of the best years of his 
life? As he emerged into the light of a watery dawn at Whitehall clutching his 
bit of paper and shouting to the waiting media: “We have a deal!” he imagined 
Tony squatting on a gilded cushion in some desert kingdom trying grubbily to 
flog London real estate to bored Arab princes. The collapse of Greece meant of 
course that peaceful, prudent Scotland was welcomed into the EU and when 
Salmond announced that Scotland would open its borders to thousands more 
refugees, migrants and asylum-seekers its reputation grew in stature.

Scotland also derived an economic dividend owing to the high number of these 
poor people who were qualified to work immediately and pay their way. 
Scotland’s population projections were climbing and the rebirth of optimism and 
renewed national pride had lifted the economy.

And when Gordon, freed from the restrictions of the 30-year rule, announced to 
his fellow Scots how much they had been charged in stealth charges to bail out 
the banks it made it easier for nation to accept the modest tax increases 
required to balance the books in the first crucial years of independence. And 
those MI5 plans to use Scotland as a human shield in the event of a nuclear 
attack finally did for Trident.

It had taken him more than 30 years, but Gordon Brown had learned how to truly 
love his country again and discovered his lost socialist roots in the process.

Perhaps they would name a new national dance after him, he mused with a 
chuckle: The Quite Affable Gordon Now, Thank You Very Much.
