
The John Hewitt Bar 

This handsome, convivial boozer is deceptive. It opened in 1999 (it's owned 
and run by theBelfast <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/belfast> Unemployed 
Resource Centre), but you could easily mistake it for a classic. It is in every 
way a "traditional" pub, all solid dark wood and apparent period detail. The 
bar itself is a grand, polished, glinting shrine. Naturally, there are no 
gimmicks.

The menu (noon to 3pm, Mon-Sat) is populist – fishcakes, a smoked salmon 
salad, steak baguette, pasta – but founded on sound local ingredients and 
delivered by a kitchen that can clearly cook. A sample portion of wild boar 
sausages with caramelised onion mash, red wine sauce and vegetables was both 
huge – a theme that, in Belfast – and about as good as sausage'n'mash is going 
to get. The sausages were naturally top drawer, but that glossy, buttery, 
roughly worked mash, properly seasoned and brilliantly laced with sweet 
caramelised onions, was awesome. As was the red wine sauce, a meaty reduction 
that smacked of deglazed roasting pans. The John Hewitt carries beers from 
Lisburn's Hilden Brewery, Ireland's oldest independent (from £3.30 a pint) – 
its eponymous bitter is a moderately tasty, pleasantly hoppy amber session beer 
– and will host theGreat Northern Irish Beer & Cider Festival 
<http://www.inyourpocket.com/northern-ireland/belfast/The-John-Hewitt-Bar-3rd-Great-Northern-Irish-Beer-and-Cider-Festival_72200f>
, from 4 July to Saturday 9.
• Meals £5.95-£8.25. 51 Donegall Street (028-9023 3768, thejohnhewitt.com 
<http://www.thejohnhewitt.com/>) 

Common Grounds

"Coffee not profit" is the motto at Common Grounds (geddit?), a cafe within 
Belfast's City Church – but run as a separate entity – which funds community 
projects in the developing world. Looking at its hip young staff and 
student/lecturer clientele, you would never guess that this place grew out of a 
church group, but for the unusual emphasis on ethical and fairly traded 
products. God may be in the details, here, but He keeps Himself very much to 
Himself. What you will notice is the very good coffee (from £1.65, supplied by 
local roasters, Bailies), the fantastic cakes and scones (around £1.80), and a 
reasonably priced menu of sandwiches, wraps and daily specials, such as red 
Thai vegetable curry.

The breakfast deal – tea or coffee and a bacon bap, £2.50 (8am-11am) – is 
highly recommended. You get a two-cup pot of proper tea, dark, tannin-packed, 
guaranteed to kick-start your morning, and the roll is spot on. The bacon is 
dry-cured and served on a floury, partially toasted bap, with a dollop of 
surprisingly good tomato chutney. Surprisingly good, that is, given that 
replacing Heinz tomato sauce with something homemade is, normally, a complete 
waste of any kitchen's time.
• Breakfast items £1.40-£3, sandwiches/wraps £3.80-£4.95, hot meals 
£3.15-£5.95. 12-24 University Avenue (028-9032 6589,commongrounds.co.uk 
<http://www.commongrounds.co.uk/>) 

Rocket & Relish
 Rocket and Relish 
Chef-owner Chris Boyd started out selling gourmet burgers at festivals from a 
converted Airstream caravan. Rocket & Relish was a commended runner-up, in 
fact, to London's celebrated Meatwagon, at the 2011 Street Food Awards. More 
recently, Boyd opened a bricks and mortar burger joint on trendy Lisburn Road. 
It is a smart space, spare, industrial and fronted, amusingly, by a wide strip 
of vivid green Astroturf where you can take a seat and munch outdoors. Even if 
you eat in, the burgers come simply wrapped in paper. You have to ask for 
cutlery. You drop your rubbish in a couple of vintage aluminium bins.

It is all brilliantly basic, until, that is, you come to the burgers, which 
come in 15 varieties, including a cranberry and brie; a burger with maple-cured 
bacon and a Cashel blue cheese dressing; and several chicken versions, 
including a Caesar-dressed breaded breast. A cheese and relish sampler actually 
consists of a 6oz burger topped with mature cheddar, country relish, aioli, 
rocket, fried onions and fresh tomato. In one way, it's a feat of burger 
engineering that it all holds together. The crisp-shelled burger buns are 
slightly doughy and absorbent and mould themselves around the contents. That is 
a crucial point and one that is often overlooked by other burger slingers. On 
the other hand, could less be more? There are a lot of strong flavours 
competing between those buns. And being ultra picky, the nicely charred, 
coarsely ground patty (of prime Northern Irish beef) could do with a shade more 
seasoning, too. But, otherwise, these are seriously good burgers. It is little 
wonder Rocket & Relish is attracting such attention. The lunchtime deal of any 
6oz burger with chips or a drink (£4.95, 11.30am-3.30pm) is Belfast's best 
bargain.
• Burgers £4-£4.75. 479-481 Lisburn Road (028-9066 5655, rocketandrelish.com 
<http://www.rocketandrelish.com>)

Grub
 Grub 
With its generically funky, chunky modish design and its neat green and white 
colour scheme, you could easily mistake this takeaway cafe for a slick chain, 
and walk on by. Approach the counter, however, and it is clear that Grub is a 
cut above its high street competitors. It's not just the signs explaining 
Grub's dedication to using local, seasonal produce – and how it gives away any 
leftovers to Belfast's homeless – but also the way that, at the counter, the 
staff rifle through a breakdown of that day's one-pot dishes, all cooked fresh 
on-site, with seemingly honest enthusiasm. As well as those daily-changing one 
pots, such as chilli, Thai curry, a chicken chowder and parsnip soup, all 
served with rice or breads, Grub also serves reputedly good deli sandwiches and 
salads.

The Irish stew looked a little stodgy and anaemic, but the potatoes had 
absorbed plenty of flavourful stock to take on a mushy, comforting texture, the 
chunks of carrot were numerous enough to add a perky sweetness and I unearthed 
a reasonable amount of good lamb. All in all, for such a simple and cheap dish 
it had a surprising depth of flavour. On a cold winter's day, it would be just 
the ticket. A Grub cappuccino, however, was pretty average.
• Sandwiches, salads and one-pot dishes £3.25-£4.50. 13 Wellington Place 
(028-9031 4925,grubbelfast.com <http://www.grubbelfast.com/>) 

Café Conor

The one-time studio of renowned local artist William Conor, Café Conor is 
nowadays a polished, airy cafe decorated with Neil Shawcross's huge black and 
white silhouettes of shapely women with big hips. Perhaps Shawcross's models 
liked to overindulge in Conor's best known dish, its Ulster Fry, and who could 
blame them? The "fry" – or, as Café Conor call it, the "big breakfast" – is one 
of the foundations of Northern Irish cuisine. It's the full English and then 
some – with added fried soda farl and potato bread. Almost everywhere in the 
province serves a version, but few are as sharp as Conor's. The sausages are a 
nominally seasoned plain pork (the correct banger for breakfast), the bacon is 
excellent, the fried egg bright and fresh. The Clonakilty black pudding – 
relatively dry, crumbly, full of oatmeal, fragrantly spiced – is very tasty. 
The only criticism would be that, while Café Conor's all-day breakfast menu is 
often praised for being clean and greaseless, I'd have liked a little butter, a 
little moisture on that great gastronomic comfort blanket, the potato bread. It 
also sells fantastic-looking scones and bakery goods (eat-in, £1.75), and while 
most of the mains nudge or break the £10 barrier, the daily lunch specials, 
such as spiced trout on chargrilled focaccia with curried potatoes and spring 
onion salad (£6.95), are generally affordable.
• Breakfast items £3.95-£6.75, regular mains from £8.50. 11a Stranmillis Road 
(028-9066 3266,cafeconor.com <http://www.cafeconor.com>)

Rhubarb
 Rhubarb, Belfast 
Tucked away off Bruce Street, tiny Rhubarb is easily missed but worth hunting 
out. Particularly if you are staying at the nearby Days Inn. At night, it turns 
into a BYO restaurant which is too expensive for the purposes of this "budget" 
round up, but by day it operates as a casual cafe, the kitchen turning out 
good, honest, freshly cooked food at keen prices. Breakfast includes French 
toast with maple syrup and grilled bacon and, of course, a "full fry" (£5.50), 
while lunch runs from homemade steak burger and classic Irish bacon, cabbage 
and buttered mash, to a warm citrus-dressed pear, walnut and crispy pork salad.

A sample plate of steak and mushroom stroganoff from the specials board was 
rich and creamy and broadly delivered: an earthy, mushroomy meatiness and, in 
the sauce, sweet, fruity paprika flavours and a certain peppery fizzle. Not bad 
at all for £5.95. The staff are friendly, too. One warning though, you may have 
to put up with the vagaries of local radio station, 97.4 Cool FM, while you 
eat. Corona's pumping Euro-rave anthem Rhythm of the Night is no digestif.
• Breakfast from £3.50, soups/sandwiches £3.50, meals £4.95-£7.50. 2 Little 
Victoria Street (028-9020 0158,rhubarb-belfast.co.uk 
<http://www.rhubarb-belfast.co.uk/>) 

Molly's Yard
 Molly's Yard 
A converted Victorian stable block in the grounds of College Green House by 
Queens University, the bijou Molly's pursues a twin-track strategy, with its 
bistro and dinner menus in various formulations through the week. Budget 
travellers need to hit Molly's when the bistro menu is available as it includes 
several sharply executed sub-£10 dishes, such as a "proper" Irish stew or fresh 
linguine with spring greens and a basil cream sauce. There are also cheaper 
snackier dishes available, like homemade soup with the kitchen's own chocolate 
stout take on that Northern Irish staple, wheaten bread.

A sample main from the specials board, of (famous Shankill Road fishmonger) 
Walter Ewing's smoked mackerel on thick toast with salad and tapenade (£7.95), 
was a thoughtful plate of food. The smoky density of the mackerel was nicely 
offset by the pointed black olive tapenade and the fresh, zingy flavours 
present in little tangles of tomato, shallot, red pepper and spring onion, a 
layer of pea shoots and red chard, and the generous dressing of grassy olive 
oil. Molly's serves several real ales from its parent company, Hilden brewery, 
and Hilden's sub-label, College Green. The latter's lemony Belfast Blonde 
(£3.10 a pint) made a good foil for the mackerel. There is a pleasant courtyard 
where you can eat on sunny days and, beer fans note, if you eat between noon 
and 5pm, you can get a pint for just £2.50. The service, incidentally, is a 
lesson in easygoing hospitality – super-efficient, chatty but in no way 
overbearing.
• Bistro menu, snacks/starters £4.50-£7.25, mains £5-£10.25. 1 College Green 
Mews, off Botanic Avenue (028-9032 2600,mollysyard.co.uk 
<http://www.mollysyard.co.uk/>) 

Little Wing Pizzeria

This small Northern Irish chain likes to cast itself as a pioneer, an 
innovator bringing authentic "Naples style" pizza to Belfast (there's also a 
branch in Bangor). There is much talk of pizzas being blast-cooked in its stone 
ovens, Italian tomatoes imported from Parma and its use of genuine mozzarella. 
With its brightly punchy tomato sauce, good mound of rocket, decent if 
sparingly distributed mozzarella and porky, spicy salsiccia sausage, my sampler 
largely backed up such hype. The base was OK, but neither paper thin nor 
properly charred. It had a slightly stiff crispness, whereas the base of a 
truly exceptional pizza would have a real suppleness, an airiness, a chewy 
vibrancy of flavour.

That said, if you visit at the right time, Little Wings still offers 
remarkable value. For £4.75 (11am-4pm, Mon-Fri) you can get a six-inch pizza 
and a half portion of salad. The sharply-dressed panzanella was very 
impressive, better than the pizza, in fact, packed as it was with parmesan, 
fresh lettuce, fruity green olives, capers, sweet roasted peppers and 
bite-sized chunks of toasted ciabatta that had absorbed a little of the 
dressing. At Little Wings, you can also get individual pizza slices and 
"tortini" pizza wraps to takeaway (slice and drink, £2.75, 11am-4pm, Mon-Fri).
• Main menu: starters from £2, pizza from £5.95. 10 Ann Street (028-9024 7000, 
littlewingpizzeria.com <http://www.littlewingpizzeria.com/>). Other branches at 
322 Lisburn Road and 201 Upper Newtownards Road

Mourne Seafood Bar
 Mourne Seafood Bar 
A restaurant fast approaching "iconic" status in Belfast, Mourne Seafood Bar, 
or MSB, is never less than good value, but, not unexpectedly, dinners break 
this series's self-imposed £10-a-head limit. But slip in during the day, when 
certain dishes are slightly cheaper, and you will feel less self-conscious 
about just snacking on a starter portion of locally smoked salmon, Santa Fe 
fishcakes with salad and guacamole, a medium pot of mussels (£6.50), or half a 
dozen oysters from Mourne's own shellfish beds at Carlingford Lough. Seafood 
chowder is ubiquitous in Belfast, but MSB chef Andy Rae's version (£5) is light 
and luxuriously creamy, a sensational seafood lucky dip mined with a little 
potato and generously seasoned with leek and garlic. Pair it with a half of 
Mourne's Oyster Stout (£1.65) for a cheap but interesting lunch with a real 
flavour of Belfast.

The stout is brewed for the restaurant by the Kilkeel brewery in Whitewater, 
and like a German schwarz beer, it is full of chocolatey roasted flavours but 
is surprisingly light and crisp. If you forgo alcohol, incidentally, you could 
eat one of a handful of the main courses which come in just under £10, such as 
a special of smoked haddock with summer vegetables, soft poached egg and herb 
velouté, or the homemade fish fingers with salad and tartare sauce. The staff 
are warmly welcoming and well-drilled, and the restaurant is a great space, too 
– a dark, cosy and informal, with a bar running along one wall and a 
fishmonger's shop at the entrance.
• Snacks/light lunches £5-£7, selected mains £8-£10. 34-36 Bank Street, 
(028-9024 8544,mourneseafood.com <http://www.mourneseafood.com/page/14/belfast/>
)

Yellow Door Deli

If £5.95 seems a lot to pay for a sandwich, Eat in the Yellow Door Deli, and 
you'll find it's a full and filling meal of real quality. A sample beef 
sandwich arrives in two huge doorstep wedges on exemplarily fresh parmesan 
bread, stuffed with good if slightly overdone beef, rocket, pokily hot 
wholegrain mustard and a thick layer of secondary salad. Even better are the 
two portions of salad on the side: a beautiful rice salad with pesto, parmesan 
and chilli, and a luxuriously thick and creamy dill-spiked potato salad 
(available separately, £1.35 for 100g).

The gourmet sandwiches are £3.95 to take away, and Yellow Door also knocks out 
cheaper items – ham and cheese croissants, ciabatta pizzas, pies, sausage rolls 
– prepared with the same care and emphasis on quality regional ingredients. Its 
cakes should not be missed. An almond and raspberry slice is £1.50 very well 
spent.
• Snack items £1.35-£3, sandwiches £3.95-£5.95. 427 Lisburn Road (028-9038 
1961,yellowdoordeli.co.uk <http://www.yellowdoordeli.co.uk/>) 

Getting there


EasyJet (easyjet <http://www.easyjet.com/asp/en/book/index.asp?lang=en>) flies 
to Belfast from Glasgow, Edinburgh, Newcastle, Manchester, Liverpool, Bristol, 
Luton, Gatwick and Stansted from £18.99 one-way including taxes. Malmaison 
Belfast (028-9022 0200,malmaison.com 
<http://www.malmaison.com/hotels/belfast/belfast-mal.aspx>) is offering two 
nights in a double room, breakfast each morning and dinner on the first night 
for just £175 per room, booked by phone. For further information on Belfast, 
visit Discover Ireland (discoverireland.com <http://www.discoverireland.com/gb/>
)
