
Known to everyone, from fellow reporters to judges, as the Prince of Darkness, 
Jimmy Nicholson, who has died aged 89, was one of the best-known postwar crime 
correspondents and, as he might himself have said, a legend in his own 
lunchtime. Famous for addressing senior police officers with a cheery “hello, 
big noise” and for having “covered every siege since Troy” and “been on more 
doorsteps than a milk bottle”, Nicholson was a larger-than-life character who 
epitomised the larky, Runyonesque side of Fleet Street crime reporting.

His curriculum vitae included almost every tabloid of the present and recent 
past, including the People, Daily Mail, Daily Express, Daily Star, Daily Sketch 
and News of the World, and he continued working well into his 80s, slipping 
cheerily on to the press benches at the Old Bailey as a jury came back with a 
verdict or holding forth in the basement press room.

Born in Batley, Yorkshire, the son Arthur Grace, a dry-stone-waller, and Kitty 
Nicholson, he went to the local technical college, where a teacher encouraged 
him to develop his writing skills. At 16, he got a job as a teaboy and general 
dogsbody on the Batley News. His first reporting job was to cover funerals, 
which he much enjoyed, as wartime rationing was relaxed for such events and he 
could enjoy a “ham tea”. He credited the experience of dealing with the 
bereaved as good training for later life as a crime correspondent.

Graduating to court reporter, he covered the assizes in Leeds, Wakefield and 
Huddersfield, meeting police officers and villains and getting to know both 
sides. “I learned to walk that narrow tightrope,” he told me, when I first met 
and interviewed him in 1988.

After postwar national service with the Fleet Air Arm, he returned to 
journalism as a crime specialist. He left his original employer after his 
expenses claim for a bus fare was queried, and joined a Blackpool paper. There 
he continued his court coverage and wrote a Round the Villages With James 
Nicholson feature. His first big crime case was that of Louisa Merrifield, who 
poisoned her landlady and was hanged for it in 1953 byAlbert Pierrepoint 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/sep/18/albert-pierrepoint-ian-sansom>
, with whom Nicholson was to become friendly.

Eight years of covering “fish and chip murders” in Blackpool followed, but 
Fleet Street beckoned after he came up with an exclusive about the singer 
George Formby’s will. His first big national story was onJames Hanratty 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/dec/30/hanratty-family-murder-case-review>, 
who was executed for murder in 1962, and who became the subject of a number of 
books questioning his guilt. For the Daily Sketch, Nicholson reported on the 
Moors murders. He later claimed that, during the investigation, he had invented 
a story, swallowed whole by his rivals, that detectives had gone undercover on 
the moors, dressed as sheep. One of the murderers, Ian Brady, complained about 
his coverage to the then Press Council, but did not pursue the matter, instead 
sending Nicholson a “wish you were here” Christmas card from Parkhurst prison.

While reporting on covens in the Isle of Man, Nicholson was given a black 
cape, which became his trademark outfit. At the Balcombe Street siege in 1975, 
at which IRA men had taken hostages, a senior police officer spotted him and 
remarked that “that devil Nicholson is here”. Someone suggested that perhaps he 
was not the devil but the Prince of Darkness. The name stuck. At least that is 
how Nicholson told me the story of his nickname; there are other versions.

One suggestion is that the name sprang from the Spaghetti House siege in 
Knightsbridge in the same year. Nicholson, in his cape, appeared on the balcony 
of the hotel room rented by a media outlet covering the siege when one 
reporter, John Edwards, said to Keith Graves of the BBC that Nicholson looked 
like Dracula, the Prince of Darkness.

“I suppose I helped to create the bloody monster,” he said of the name. “It’s 
become a bit of a burden.” Even judges referred to him as “prince”. He tried to 
alter the image once, arriving dressed entirely in white for the 1976 murder 
trial of Donald Neilson, the so-called Black Panther. Also known as “Jimmy 
Nick”, he was proud of having covered so many big crime stories. “I’ve been at 
every execution since the crucifixion,” he would tell young reporters. “And 
I’ll tell you something – that guy was innocent.”

He was president and later treasurer of the Crime 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Reporters Association and wore his 
Guinness-stained CRA tie – crossed handcuffs and quill pen on crimson 
background – with pride. He was an expert “buy-up” man, persuading people to 
tell their story for a cheque, often knowing full well that his paper would not 
come through with the promised sum. “I used to lie, I’m afraid,” he confessed. 
“Got to meet fire with fire.”

He defended the practice of knocking on the doors of the bereaved: “After a 
horrific murder, people want to talk to you. If they’re guilty, I’ve had people 
rehearse their story to me before they speak to the police. You go in and say 
‘James Nicholson, crime reporter. I’d like to talk to you.’ In a lot of 
circumstances, you have to put your foot in the door.”

Cowboy films were his escape route from the grim stories he reported. In 
semi-retirement, he remained a tip-off man for various papers, an incorrigible 
presence at CRA functions and often the person asking the awkward question at a 
press conference.

He became unwell a few years ago and moved into residential care.

He is survived by his wife, Mavis, whom he married in 1952, and their 
children, Jeremy, Justin and Melanie.

• James Nicholson, crime reporter, born 16 January 1927; died 12 June 2016
