
 Ruth Badger knows all about the great benefits of apprenticeships. The 
Birmingham businesswoman rose to public prominence when she featured on the 
second series of The Apprentice in 2006 – but she was also a real apprentice at 
the age of 16.

 Runner up in Lord Sugar’s competition, she has since become a household name 
for excellence in business, and she still supports the power of apprenticeships.

 “Different things suit different industries,” she says. “I think when it’s 
practical, apprenticeships are suitable.”

 Badger runs three successful businesses – and couldn’t be more 
pro-apprenticeships. TheNational Skills Academy Health 
<http://www.nsahealth.org.uk/> caught up with her to get her thoughts on 
apprenticeship opportunities and why these shouldn’t get passed up.

How did your apprenticeship shape your career?


 At 16, I applied for 32 jobs. My parents told me if I didn’t get one, I’d 
have to go back to school. As it turns out, I didn’t get the jobs, so I went 
back to school and did two months of A-levels and honestly, I couldn’t cope.

 I went to the job centre and they were offering two-year YTSs [youth training 
schemes] to work there, and so I did mine in six months.
 Ruth Badger with apprentices Georgia Quin and Jamey Baines: ‘My apprentices 
are a massive part of the team.’ Photograph: Ruth Badger Consultancy 
 If I hadn’t done my apprenticeship, I wouldn’t be where I am today. Which is 
why I’m so passionate about them – not because of the TV show, but because I’ve 
got my own four apprentices. Sometimes all people need sometimes is the 
opportunity, and apprenticeships give them that.

When you started your apprenticeship, how were they seen?

 I started my apprenticeship in 1995 when they were called YTS. The stigma was 
massive. It was seen as something people who had failed school did. I was in 
all the top bands in school, but I chose it because I wanted to leave. All I 
wanted to do was get into the working world and earn money.

Hard work pays off 

How do you use your apprenticeship experience in your businesses?

 I run three businesses and actively use apprenticeships to start my 
entry-level members of staff.

 I went through education for 15 years and walked away with five GCSEs. In six 
months of an apprenticeship, I gained an NVQ level 2 with a distinction – 
equivalent to five GCSEs in six months. I showed that I had an amazing work 
ethic – and still do.

Why do you think apprenticeships work?

 At 16, everyone is asked what they want to do. Apprenticeships give people 
the opportunity to get into the world and find out [what they want to do].

 If we didn’t have apprenticeships as employers, we wouldn’t be able to 
cultivate the next generation of talent. And if apprenticeships weren’t there 
for the individuals, it would be like turning off the light in what is a 
positive channel.

Importance of practical skills

What makes a good apprentice?

 I’d say attitude and work ethic. What apprenticeships do is give people the 
opportunity to taste work, and also give practical skills to those willing to 
learn.

 In my business Everything Tech, I’ve got four apprentices; two have passed 
and next year I’ll take on another two. It’s a fundamental element to my model 
to bring in apprentices. So if they have a good attitude and a good work ethic, 
we can work with that. The moment you have that opportunity, it’s about making 
it your own.

How do you think apprenticeships work differently for healthcare as opposed to 
business?

 Healthcare is very different. My mum is a principle officer for Unison, so 
I’m aware of what she does. There’s the emotional side as well as the 
practical. They need compassion, and no university or course can teach that. 
You can’t nurse sitting behind a desk. You can learn the academic side, but you 
only learn compassion by experience, which is why apprenticeships are made for 
healthcare roles.

Rewards for success

Does The Apprentice give people an idea of what apprenticeships entail?

 Lord Sugar has done unbelievable things for apprentices. The Apprentice is 
about doing practical business, whether we like it or loathe it, which entices 
the younger generation to have an interest in business.

 When I was 16, programmes about business on television were boring. If I’d 
had something like The Apprentice, it would have helped.

 The Apprentice shows you what you can achieve. It’s 10 years on and I still 
get enquiries to speak, all because I showed that I can deliver what I say I’m 
going to.

What makes a good apprenticeship?

 It’s about giving them a working life. They will also get structure in 
relation to training and development, and an infrastructure to support them. 
We’ve invested £10,000 in Microsoft training applications and the first people 
to get them are my apprentices. If they went to college, they wouldn’t be able 
to afford those qualifications. My apprentices are a massive part of the team. 
Apprenticeships show them what they can have if the desire is there, and it’s 
rewarding to see them succeed.

The National Skills Academy for Health assists healthcare organisations in 
recruiting,employing and managing apprentices through its Apprenticeship 
Training Agency <http://www.nsahealth.org.uk/ata> . With support staff making 
up nearly a third of our nation’s healthcare workforce, the National Skills 
Academy helps to ensure this vital sector of the workforce get the training 
they need to maximise their potential and play their part in maintaining a high 
quality health service. For advice on apprenticeship training visit
www.nsahealth.org.uk <http://www.nsahealth.org.uk>


Ruth Badger owns three businesses - Ruth Badger Consultancy 
<http://ruthbadger.com/>, Everything Tech <http://www.everythingtech.co.uk/> and
Everything Comms <http://www.everythingcomms.com/>. 

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Skills for Health 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/>
