
I’d just been appointed art director at Island Records when I became aware 
they’d signedMarianne Faithfull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marianne-faithfull>. It was 1979 and there 
was an album to be released,Broken English. Word was that it was mind-blowing, 
but first they needed to shoot the artwork for the sleeve. This turned out to 
be a difficult process. They tried all the great photographers, but weren’t 
happy with any of the shots. I persuaded them to give me a go.

I met Marianne at a studio in west London. The first thing she said was: “Do 
you know who I am?” She was wearing a mackintosh and shift dress, and seemed 
like she’d had a drink. She put her things down and said she wanted more to 
drink, so we went to a pub. I could see she was testing me. She’d say things 
like: “This is going to cost you at least £200,” which of course it didn’t – it 
was just a regular pub in Notting Hill and we had a couple of gin and tonics.

She ordered pretty much everything on the menu, then got up and turned the 
table over

After a few more drinks, she asked to go to an Italian restaurant. We found a 
run-of-the-mill place and she ordered tons of food – pretty much everything on 
the menu. The table was covered in plates, but it soon became obvious she 
wasn’t going to eat any of it. For a while I pretended not to notice. Then, 
quietly, she got up and turned the table over.

I told the waiters I’d pay for everything and we left. Marianne found it very 
funny. I think she knew the importance of the album and its image. She was 
sussing me out, trying to get us to a place where she knew something electric 
could happen.

Back at the studio, we played her album. She went to get changed and when she 
came out she was glowing. The next thing she was rolling around on the floor. 
At one point I was standing over her with the camera and, as she looked up, she 
said coquettishly: “Don’t you want to fuck me?”

Then, all of a sudden, she got up. All we had in the studio was a leather 
armchair so she took a cigarette and sat down. I was still clicking the camera 
and there was this moment where she slowly exhaled a breath. That’s when we got 
it – the shot that became the infamous sleeve.

As soon as that was over, we reached a point of: “Where do we go now?” It felt 
like two people had met for the first time, had mind-blowing sex and then 
turned around to look at each other and realised it was all over.

We stayed friends afterwards. Even now I still get the odd email from Marianne.

Dennis Morris’s photography exhibition, PiL – First Issue to Metal Box, runs 
from 23 March to 15 May at the ICA, London SW1 (ica.org.uk 
<https://www.ica.org.uk/whats-on/dennis-morris-pil-first-issue-metal-box>)
