
I have two sources of childcare advice - for specifics, I mean, not for the 
moral universe, for which I consult Pingu - which are C's cousin and my sister. 
C's cousin is an actual childcare professional. It's like meeting a real GP in 
the pub, you hang on their every word. That must be why GPs never go to the pub 
(unless alcohol is somehow bad for you? Surely not).

Anyway, C's cousin says her cornerstone is never to make a threat you're not 
prepared to carry out. And the next time I saw my sister, after I heard that, I 
arrived just as she was telling her older daughter that unless she changed out 
of her pyjamas, S was going to go and do a poo on her pillow. Which was great, 
you know, because she was just about to go to work, so if anyone was going to 
make good on this threat, it would have to be me. It's not as easy as it looks, 
in other words, just cobbling together a strategy from other people.

Not my problem, I thought before. T does not listen to reason, and he doesn't 
do anything wrong. Other parents have to threaten and bribe; all I have to do 
is have a sunny nature and not always be reading the paper. Stupid, stupid 
non-childcare non-expert. That was his observational phase, where he worked out 
how to be bad. Now we're in his interim phase, where he unleashes all he has 
learned, but we're not yet at phase three, where I make threats that I 
definitely intend to carry out, and he understands them. So I'm still stuck 
with dog-training, and trying to apply it to human mischief.

This is how it's going: T pulled little D's hair, and then hit her, for no 
reason that either she or I could fathom - just testing the boundaries of human 
endurance. I went with the reprimand-then-ignore manoeuvre, where you then 
lavish love upon the victim, and you don't have to accuse the perpetrator, he 
accuses himself. Yeah. The first flaw in this is D's vivid sense of justice. 
She didn't think ignoring him really fitted his crime; I think she wanted me to 
stab him. So the love didn't soothe her at all, she just seemed to get more and 
more enraged at my incompetence. I felt like Geoffrey Howe, being bawled out by 
Margaret Thatcher . . . I knew I'd had a plan, but she'd got so cross I'd 
forgotten what it was. This is just presumptuous. Who knows how Howe truly felt?

T, meanwhile, does not like to be ignored - that much is true throughout the 
dog and human kingdom. Attention is currency. But he doesn't just sit there, 
thinking, "I don't like this withdrawal of affection, brrr, so cold, outside 
the sunshine of love, I must be less violent in the future." No, no, no, he 
quickly devised fresh attention-getting strategies. He sat in my friend's 
chives and bounced up and down. What do you do then, reprimand the bouncer and 
praise the chives? How's that going to help? I'd still have a friend thinking, 
"What will I put on my potatoes? When will they leave?"

If it were just you and the child in a vacuum-packed dyad, it would be 
straightforward. You'd be consistent because none of it would be an act, it 
would all come consistently from your consistent core. But largely, telling off 
your toddler is something you do for other people's benefit, because you want 
to look like you're doing it properly, dealing with your infant in a robust, 
mature way, not treating him like a spoilt hairless cat on a velvet pillow. And 
also you feel bad about their chives. Furthermore, most of the bad things the 
toddler does are aimed at the outside world, because there's a limit to how 
much fun they can have pulling the same parent's hair and trying to poke the 
same eyes out.

But it's a minefield, because there's an inauthenticity at the heart of your 
reprimands. You're just doing it for show, and every mug can see it, even an 
under-two who still insists that both cats and dogs say "wee-ow". So T scorns 
my fake authority. Or probably I'm just imagining it, and he's somewhere else 
entirely, wondering what you actually have to do to hair to get it out of a 
head.

It'll be different when they can talk. I'll dazzle them with my skills of 
reasoning. I won't have to stop them fighting, or defend plants pot by pot, 
I'll be able to prove, Socratically, that all herbs deserve respect. I'm not 
going to parent like the Dog Whisperer.

Or Geoffrey Howe.
