
I have always hated picnics, unless they take place on a beach. I find sitting 
on the ground uncomfortable (at least on a beach you can sit on a rock), and 
the food is always fiddly – lots of little things sweating inside Tupperware 
boxes.

On a beach you can pretend to be a hunter, knocking limpets off rocks and 
eating them straight from the shell, or (if you have a boat, and a dash of luck 
on your side) catching fresh mackerel to cook over a driftwood fire. On a 
beach, too, you can keep your booze cool by dangling it in the sea – and dangle 
yourself in if you feel the need for invigoration.

To make a landlocked picnic bearable, I need two things. The first is a hiking 
chair, an unglamorous but brilliant invention that folds out from a small 
square of nylon into a seat with a back support. Aaah. That’s better.

Next, the food has to be worth the bother. Something simple but a bit 
spectacular – in this case, salmon en croute. It is a lovely, old-fashioned 
dish, redolent of 70s dinner parties and dog-eared copies of the Good 
Housekeeping cookbook. Salmon en croute has the advantage of coming in its own 
packaging: a moreish crust of flaky pastry.

Related: Think pink: Yotam Ottolenghi’s salmon recipes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/06/salmon-recipes-fishcakes-cured-poached-yotam-ottolenghi>

It is delicious at room temperature, but if you want it warm you can wrap it 
in newspaper and foil straight out of the oven, and it should still be warm 
when you unwrap it. Slice it up and eat it with your fingers. Then sit back in 
your hiking chair and enjoy the last of the summer.

Salmon in pastry

This is good at any temperature so is perfect to take on a picnic. 
Good-quality frozen puff pastry can be used, too, very successfully.

Serves 4-6
For the pastry
175g plain flour
1 tsp caster sugar
A pinch of salt
125g cold unsalted butter, diced
An egg, for glazing

 For the salmon
800-900g salmon fillet (thickest end if possible), skinned and pin-boned
125g soft butter
100g stem ginger, drained, finely chopped
50g currants 
1 egg beaten 
Salt and black pepper

1 Preheat the oven to 220C/425F/gas mark 7, then make the pastry. Put the 
flour, sugar and salt into a food processor and pulse to mix. Add the butter 
and pulse briefly until the mix resembles breadcrumbs.

2 Transfer to a bowl and stir in enough iced water to form a dough (about 3-4 
tbsp). It should be soft but not too wet. Wrap in clingfilm and chill for at 
least 30 minutes.

3 Trim the salmon and cut it in half lengthways so you have two thick strips.

4 Mix the butter with the chopped stem ginger and currants. Season well.

5 Roll out the pastry into a large rectangle, on a floured surface, slightly 
longer than the salmon and wide enough to wrap around it.

6 Season the two pieces of salmon. Smear one fillet with half the butter. 
Place the other salmon piece on top and spread with the rest of the butter. 
Acting quickly, transfer the salmon to the middle of the pastry sheet, flipping 
it over so it is butter-side down. Pull the pastry up on one side and brush 
with the beaten egg. Pull up the other side so the salmon is completely 
enclosed and sealed with the egg wash. Trim the ends so there is not too much 
pastry and, using more egg wash, seal each end, pinching the pastry tightly.

5 Transfer to a baking-parchment-lined tray by rolling the salmon over on to 
the tray so the seal is underneath. Brush the parcel with more egg. If there 
are any cracks, use the pastry trimmings to patch them up.

6 Allow the parcel to rest in the fridge for about 30 minutes. Then put it in 
the hot oven for half an hour, turning the salmon round halfway through 
cooking. The pastry should be golden-brown all over. Remove it and allow it to 
rest on the top of the oven for about 15 minutes.

Herby potato salad

750g new or waxy potatoes
1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
1 tbsp cider vinegar 
1 large shallot, finely chopped
1 tbsp tarragon, chervil and chives, chopped 
1 tsp Dijon mustard
2 tbsp crème fraîche
Salt and black pepper

1 Cut the potatoes in half or quarters, depending on their size. Cook in 
boiling salted water for 15 minutes, or until just tender. Drain well and toss 
with the oil, vinegar and shallots. Season well and allow to cool.

2 In a large bowl, mix together the rest of the ingredients. Fold through the 
potatoes and season well.

Bean and sugar snap salad

150g french beans
150g sugar snap peas
2 heads fennel, shaved
3 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Juice of ½ a lemon
1 garlic clove, crushed
Leaves from a few sprigs basil, shredded
Salt and black pepper

1 Trim the beans and cut in half. Trim the sugar snaps and slice diagonally. 
Blanch in boiling water for a few minutes or until tender. Refresh with cold 
water and drain well.

2 Toss with the shaved fennel. Whisk together the other ingredients and toss 
through the veg. Season well.

• Henry Dimbleby is co-founder of the natural fast-food restaurant chain Leon
@HenryDimbleby <https://twitter.com/henrydimbleby>. Jane Baxter is a chef and 
food writer based in Devon@baxcooka 
<https://twitter.com/baxcooka?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
