
I’m rapidly approaching 63 years of age. I grew up in a Daily Mirror-reading 
family on a council estate in Harwich. I left school at 16, got a job as a 
trainee accountant and two years later somehow ended up at drama school. Until 
I was 33 I worked as a fairly unsuccessful actor. I started reading the 
Guardian at drama school, mainly for the theatre reviews, and by the mid-70s it 
had become my newspaper of choice. I even appeared in an article, “Camp 
Theatre”, about theatre at Butlin’s in August 1975.

In 1983 I met Maria, my wife of over 30 years, at the English Theatre in 
Frankfurt and moved to Germany permanently in 1986 to work as an English 
teacher. We have two sons aged 30 and 16 (number two was a bit of a shock), and 
live in a beautiful 17th-century half-timbered house. I still work for the same 
company, Target Training, as a part-time bookkeeper. The rest of the time I 
work as a voice-over artist whenever an English voice is required, and still do 
the odd bit of theatre.

When I first came to Germany I read the Guardian Weekly, but now during the 
week I read the Guardian online, and every Saturday buy the paper. I start with 
the sport, family, travel and then move on to the news section. I always save 
the review section for Sunday morning with a cup of tea in bed, while Maria 
does the puzzles.The Guardian <http://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> is 
the closest newspaper to me politically and tends to be grown up, except for 
some of the readers’ comments. Friends here sometimes claim it’s too PC, but 
maybe so am I.

I used to love reading Frank Keating, and now enjoy Lucy Mangan, Ian Jack, 
Gary Younge and the letters. To be honest I love it all. Except for all the ads 
in the Saturday edition. 90% of them are aimed solely at British consumers. Can 
it be that difficult to edit them out of the European edition? I can’t imagine 
ever not reading the Guardian, even if you bring in a paywall.

• If you would like to be interviewed in this space, send a brief note to 
good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com <mailto:good.to.meet.you@theguardian.com>
