
Last week, politicians and the chief inspector of schools fell over themselves 
to denounce Islamic "extremism" in a handful ofBirmingham 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> state schools. If you check the 
definition of extremism, it means to hold an opinion far outside "the norm". 
Hence, inspectors found schools doing extremist-y things, such as not having a 
tombola at a fete and using a bank account that doesn't accumulate interest – 
Islam forbids both. In response, the media whipped itself into a frenzy, asking 
to what extent "because of God" is an acceptable reason for deciding school 
practices.

It may well be that some schools did step over boundaries of what is "the 
norm" but Muslims in Birmingham are annoyed about the saga: they are always 
treated differently. To be a socially conservative Muslim, much of the recent 
discussion implies, is to be inches from turning into a full-blown jihadi, 
which is as daft as thinking that every child raised in a fervent Catholic home 
is about to run off and become a nun.

As if to hammer home that point, almost unnoticed on the other side of the 
country, in a tiny courtroom, the Department for Education last week spent 
public money fighting to hide information about another school whose views also 
fall outside "the norm".

Steiner schools are based on an understanding of child development rooted in 
the spiritual movement of "anthroposophy", first created by the (unarguably 
racist) Austrian philosopher Rudolf Steiner. Though now distanced from Steiner 
himself, the schools retain several of his odder ideas.

For example, children regularly partake in sessions of "eurythmy", a form of 
expressive dance performed in robes to help children develop their spirit in 
its "new life". Steiner was big on reincarnation.

In this courtroom we were told that some Steiner schools also don't offer 
vaccinations to their pupils and that their first-aid kits include homeopathic 
remedies. Whatever else these ideas are, "within the norm" is not one of them.

As with the schools in Birmingham, however, the norm-diversions don't add up 
to a lack of quality. Parents fork out hard cash to get their children into the 
26 private Steiner schools across England. In 2008, the first publicly funded 
Steiner school opened under the academies programme. Since 2010, two Steiner 
free schools have opened and another will do so in September. So far the two 
schools that received Ofsted inspections are rated as "good".

So why the secrecy? It's not entirely clear. In May 2012, Richy Thompson – 
campaigns officer for the British Humanist Association – submitted a Freedom of 
Information request to the DfE asking for documents prepared to advise 
ministers on whether Steiner schools ought to be given state funding via the 
free schools programme. Given that three schools got the go-ahead, one would 
think the information was likely to come out in favour of the schools. The DfE 
certainly wanted them: even going so far as to grant them an exemption from key 
stage 1 Sats – because Steiner schools do not like children to be taught 
writing prior to the "second dentition" (the arrival of adult teeth).

However, back in 2012 and ever since, the DfE has continued to refuse to 
release the information – despite the Information Commissioner ruling that the 
public interest would be better served by its release.

Hence, last Tuesday – as a handful of Birmingham schools were told that they 
did not have a sufficiently "broad and balanced curriculum" because they taught 
limited sex and religious education – a DfE civil servant stood in court and 
defended Steiner's narrow range of GCSEs before a judge. Hereford Steiner 
academy, for example, offers only five GCSEs – with science only included for 
the first time last year – but requires all students to take a BTec in 
"Countryside and the Natural Environment". This mix might be justifiable under 
the Steiner philosophy, but "broad and balanced" it ain't.

And so the question is inevitably raised – why defend one type of "extremism" 
while chucking the other under the bus? It has already been noted that Jewish 
schools do not attract the same attention when they drift into the extremes.

One argument is that the Birmingham schools were not designated faith schools. 
But this misses the point: many children end up in religious schools even when 
they are not religious, simply because that's what is on offer in the local 
area. This happened recently with a Sikh school, until parents complained and 
alternative places were found. Yet in other parts of the country where there 
are only Christian or single sex schools, there is rarely an outcry.

A second argument is that parents should have the "choice" to send their child 
to a school of a particular ethos, however odd. But if we're simply going by 
parents' wishes, then the enormously over-subscribed Birmingham schools ought 
to be given a big thumbs up.

Ultimately, it seems the government is willing to defend some types of 
extremism, but the line of acceptability is not only blurred but purposely 
hidden behind legal lines. We may find out more about their thinking in four 
weeks' time – if the judge rules the right way.
