
Geoff Barton, headteacher, King Edward VI school, Bury St Edmunds


I remember when Kenneth Baker came up with GCSEs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses> in 1988. The idea of having a 
general certificate which would apply to most of the population – rather than 
the previous situation predicated on the idea that O-levels were for the elite 
and CSEs were second rate – was a very egalitarian move. It's a shame that it 
was sullied by performance tables and by people playing around with vocational 
qualifications. At the moment, lots of students are educated in 11-16 schools. 
Unless that system is changed – and we use assessment as it ought to be used, 
to help students know what they need to do better, rather than for league 
tables – my guess is that we will still need to have some form of external 
assessment to make decisions about post-16 pathways.

Danielle Egonu-Obanye, deputy headteacher at a secondary school in east London

The system of GCSEs and A-levels <http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>
 as entrance qualifications for university is still prevalent in British 
culture but we need to accept that we are in a global economy, and be looking 
to make our children relevant on a global scale. They need a global 
qualification. But if schools start moving in that direction and thinking about 
different qualifications – such as the international baccalaureate – they need 
to know that the qualification will be recognised.

Russell Hobby, general secretary of National Association of Head Teachers 
(NAHT)

With the school-leaving age going up to 18, it would make far more sense to 
have a 14-18 pathway with a single baccalaureate-style qualification at the 
end. You could build different pathways to suit academic versus vocational 
requirements, which would make sense in terms of what students need. Rather 
than doing academic work up to 16 and then vocational after 16, they'd be doing 
a blend of both from 14 onwards. The trouble is, the structure of our education 
system really doesn't help. It's hard to see how you could have schools, 
sixth-form colleges and others co-operating to deliver this provision. We'd 
need some quite radical changes to make it work.

The international baccalaureate allows you to combine softer skills with 
academic study. There are also advantages to having an international 
qualification – it's useful for people who will work abroad in the future.

Sarah Chitson, just finished year 11 at Henry Box school in Witney

When I get my GCSE results later this week, I hope they'll show me what I'm 
good at and what I'm not so good at so that I know I'm making the right A-level 
choices. They might not matter as much to universities as A-levels, but they're 
important to me because they lead to the next step. I'll know whether or not my 
A-level choices are the right ones – it won't be based on a teacher's opinion, 
it'll be based on an exam that the whole country has taken.

Roderick Smith, director of admissions at the University of Birmingham

From next year, when AS-levels will no longer count towards final A-level 
results, GCSEs will be the only formal record we'll have of an applicant's 
academic ability and potential. We will want to look at the GCSE grades and the 
reference that comes from the teacher to see if we believe the predicted grades 
on a student's university application. We already take GCSEs very seriously: if 
a subject is not offered at A-level, for example, we might want it at GCSE. Or 
if someone wants to do a year abroad then we'd want a language at GCSE with 
grade A. So they are a really useful benchmark for us.

Rob Wall, head of education and employment policy at the Confederation of 
British Industry

Employers do value GCSEs because they're a recognised qualification and an 
indication of ability, but they're not the be-all and end-all. Actually, what 
employers value isn't qualifications or academic results, it's character and 
resilience. They want curious and creative people – we would like a curriculum 
better aligned to those outcomes. As we see the school-leaving age rising, we 
would question the value of high-stakes exams at 16 and would look more to 
outcomes at 18 – both academic and vocational.

Rob Davies, principal at Carter community school in Poole

GCSEs are an important benchmark in terms of how we're doing as a school. Also 
for students, it's good to have something on their CV that is comparative, so 
they can stand out in the job market. The international baccalaureate 
qualification is superb, but it's not for everybody, it's really geared around 
the academic high-fliers.
