
The dilemma My partner is an educated professional woman and quite successful. 
She clings to the rock of feminism as a justification of having to be in her 
terms a “strong woman” in today’s world. The reality is that she is emotionally 
detached, always angry, frigid, mostly frustrated and often dysfunctional. What 
pleasures her most is flirting with younger men, leering perversely over images 
of men in the media, and finding in every conversation an angle to deride or 
belittle men in general. Ironically I put it to you that I am a man trapped in 
a marriage with a “female chauvinist pig” making my life miserable day by day. 
How do I escape?

Mariella replies Is that you Jason? This could be my husband’s belated idea of 
an April Fools’ joke. If not, this creature is surely the fearful modern man’s 
worst nightmare. She certainly doesn’t represent a positive outcome to the 
drawn-out struggle for equality we remain engaged in. Rather your partner 
sounds like a throwback to the 1970s and those bra-burning feminists bent on 
proving they could beat men at their own game.

Can women simply evolve into male stereotypes? The reverse is what men seem to 
be intent on if the huge increase in sales of men’s grooming products is 
anything to go by. I’d really hoped that having both sexes involved in 
advancing our world would create better balance and evolutionary potential for 
us all. Instead, if your letter is evidence of what’s happening with women, 
we’re all in big trouble.

Your dilemma would have seemed less credible had I not just read a horror 
story disguised as an article about young female bankers inES magazine. 
Entirely committed to the pursuit of cash, designer-clad, waking at 5am to do 
power workouts before a blowdry and a board meeting, these Barbie bankers 
seemed high on testosterone and low on mitigating human virtues. Most chilling 
was their definition of a perfect date: a Tinder rendezvous at least seven 
stops from Liverpool Street (in order to avoid colleagues).

Either your wife is a walking, talking cliché, or you’re having a laugh

Well that’s the feminist initiative gone badly wrong if such disciples of 
bodily perfection, total control and the “zipless fuck” expand beyond a 
self-obsessed minority. As with these misguided girls and their soul-destroying 
aping of redundant male stereotypes, the description you paint of your wife is 
so at odds with the majority of women I encounter that it leaves me with an 
uneasy sense of incredulity. It’s certainly a first to have a letter bemoaning 
a female partner for flirting with younger guys and drooling over men in 
magazines. Being loud and proud about possessing a libido is one thing – 
turning into the female embodiment of Benny Hill is quite another. If she 
really is this ranting, raving, cold-hearted fury, why are you still there?

The advice I’d offer you is no different to that I’d give to any woman in a 
relationship where their partner humiliates them, leers over their gender while 
belittling them and fails to live up to any reasonable behavioural 
expectations. I appreciate your pain, but if you despise your partner to the 
extent you appear to, then escape is the inevitable choice. So could there be 
another agenda for caricaturing your wife so effectively? Either she is a 
walking, talking cliché embodying every quality we’d hoped to smooth away from 
the male of the species, or you’re having a laugh!

There are contradictions in your letter, including your description of this 
sexually predatory female who’s also frigid. Is it you she isn’t interested in 
sex with, or all of mankind? Certainly if I felt as you do about the person I 
was sharing my life with, I’d hope to have the courage to step away from that 
relationship without qualms. You should probably be Googling alternative 
accommodation instead of penning letters to me.

If, on the other hand, you want me to condemn your wife for your fantastically 
constructed cliché of a feminist dragon, then I’m afraid you should have added 
some nuance to your character assassination. You may well be living with the 
worst kind of woman a man can imagine, or you may have blown life into her with 
a plethora of hot air. You say “ironically I put it to you” which does raise 
the spectre of the whole of your letter being an attempt to raise the dormant 
crazy bitch in me to do battle on behalf of the sisterhood. You seem to have 
wound up with the feminine equivalent of a Costa Brava beer lout, all 
unreformed emotions and sexist bluster. The bottom line is she sounds 
horrendous, like Glenn Close’s bunny boiler inFatal Attraction and every other 
female ogre dreamt up by men; I can’t help wondering if she’s equally fictional.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
