
The number of Britons identified as victims of human trafficking increased by 
more than 50% during 2014, the NationalCrime 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency has revealed.

An NCA report found that traffickers used social media and smartphone apps to 
recruit British nationals for sexual exploitation, while some victims were 
being “controlled” by drugs and alcohol.

A total of 3,309 people, including 732 children, were identified as potential 
victims of human trafficking in the UK – a 21% increase on the previous year. 
Of that total, 300 were British nationals, 55% more than in 2013.

The report said the UK remained the most prevalent country of origin for 
potential child victims, with 116 cases.

Caroline Young, the deputy director of the NCA’s organised crime command, said 
the figures showed authorities were “increasingly encountering and recognising 
examples of trafficking in our society”.

“Human trafficking is an insidious and complex crime where much of the 
exploitation is hidden from view,” she said. “The National Crime Agency is 
committed to continually disrupting this vicious criminal trade in human 
misery, which exploits the most vulnerable people, both here and abroad, for 
financial gain.

“Victims are being forced to work in private houses and in hospitality, 
farming, manufacturing and construction industries. In many cases, threats and 
violence are used to ensure compliance. The NCA will continue to work closely 
with a range of partners to help eradicate this vile crime.”

Human trafficking <http://www.theguardian.com/law/human-trafficking> is the 
movement of a person from one place to another, deliberately to exploit them 
for reasons including labour, sex or crime. Victims are usually deceived or 
coerced into giving consent to be moved.

In its fourth annual report on human trafficking, the NCA said Romania was the 
most prevalent country of origin of potential victims of all ages. This had 
been the case for the previous three years.

The south-east of the UK recorded the highest number of potential British 
victims, with 51, while there were 34 in the north-east, 31 in the east 
Midlands and 14 in London.

The NCA report said: “In many cases of UK nationals trafficked internally for 
sexual exploitation, potential victims report being controlled by the use of 
drugs and alcohol, stating that they were so ‘out of it’ at times that they did 
not know what happened to them.

“Another potential victim reported that those exploiting her had pictures of 
her that they threatened to ‘show around’.”

Javed Khan, the chief executive of the children’s charity Barnardo’s, said 
there was still much to be done to combat trafficking. “These figures are just 
the tip of the iceberg,” he said. “We are pleased that more children are being 
identified as trafficked but we know there are many more who are missed.

“There’s a long way to go until frontline workers are able to spot the signs 
and recognise the victims of this terrible crime.”

In total, 298 potential victims of human trafficking of all nationalities were 
identified in London in 2014, followed by 289 in the south-east, 235 in the 
south-west and 226 in Yorkshire and Humber.

There were 193 potential victims in the West Midlands, 181 in eastern England, 
167 in the east Midlands, 133 in the north-west, 67 in Scotland, 66 in Northern 
Ireland, 54 in the north-east and 16 in Wales.

The remaining potential victims were recorded as being in multiple areas, 
overseas or their location was unknown.
