
Darryl on James


What were you hoping for?
A good rapport, and if we clicked, who knows?

First impressions?
Very good. James is handsome and elegant.

What did you talk about?
We couldn’t stop talking at first. We forgot to order the wine, we were so 
engrossed.

Any awkward moments?
There were, as the evening went on, inevitable gaps in the conversation.

Good table manners?
Kept my glass full and always waited for me to order.

Best thing about James?
Intelligent and very open. We have similar politics, which is the most 
important thing for me. I could never kiss a Tory.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Yes.

Related: Blind date 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/17/blind-date-kati-matt> 

Describe him in three words.
Articulate, friendly, chatty.

What do you think he made of you?
I hope something similar.

Did you go on somewhere?
He walked me to his bus stop, which was not the most direct way home for me, 
but I was happy to follow.

And… did you kiss?
Yes, we did kiss and hug – the natural thing to do.

If you could change one thing, what would it be?
We both said too much at the beginning, owing to nerves. I would like to have 
paced myself better.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
As friends. There was a spark at the beginning but it had fizzled out by the 
end.

James on Darryl


What were you hoping for?
That it wouldn’t be someone I already knew.

First impressions?
Very friendly and smiley. We were gassing away in no time.

What did you talk about?
Movies, travels and our varied medical histories.

Any awkward moments?
When he said he loved football and I said, “Er, I don’t like football at all.”

Good table manners?
No plate-licking to report.

Best thing about Darryl?
Twinkly eyes.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Of course.

Describe him in three words.
Funny, chatty, sweet.

What do you think he made of you?
I hope he didn’t think I had too much of a potty mouth.

Did you go on somewhere?
Just to my bus stop.

And… did you kiss?
A quick peck goodbye but not a full-on pashing.

If you could change one thing, what would it be?
Nothing, it was very pleasant.

Marks out of 10?
7.5.

Would you meet again?
I hope he’ll become a friend. We got on like a house on fire, but there was no 
spark.

• James and Darryl ate at MK Bar & Grill <http://www.mkbarandgrill.co.uk>, 
London SW7.
