
What would it have been like to visit Hampton Court Palace two-and-a-half 
centuries ago, when the great landscape architect, Lancelot “Capability” Brown, 
was chief gardener there under George III? And why would Catherine the Great of 
Russia, of all people, also have been keen to see the palace? Visit Hampton 
Court this spring or summer and you can find out, as a unique collection of 18th
-century drawings of the palace and its gardens, recently rediscovered in the 
Hermitage Museum in St Petersburg, goes on display to the public for the first 
time.

The exhibition, The Empress and the Gardener 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/304155071;133262059;s>, is timed to 
celebrate the 300th anniversary of Brown’s birth. Yet the “gardener” at the 
heart of this story isn’t Brown, as you might expect. Instead it’s his 
little-known assistant, John Spyers – a garden surveyor and small-time artist, 
who made a portfolio of illustrations of Hampton Court while he lived and 
worked here in the late 18th century.

 Catherine the Great. Photograph: Alamy 
About the time of Brown’s death, Spyers sold 150 of his drawings to the 
garden-mad, Catherine the Great of Russia – who was keen to create landscapes 
based on the very latest fashionable English designs – and was paid the 
enormous sum of 1,000 roubles for his work.

The drawings later languished in the stores of Catherine’s Winter Palace, for 
more than two centuries. As part of the exhibition, you can see contemporary 
portraits of Brown, Catherine and George III; as well as drawings of 
Catherine’s “English garden” at Peterhof, near St Petersburg, sketched by her 
Scots gardener, James Meader, who brokered the deal with Spyers back in 
England. There are even pieces from the famous “Green Frog” table service, 
created for the anglophile Catherine by Wedgwood – and depicting landscapes 
brought to life by Brown.

But perhaps the greatest pleasure is the chance to see one of the most 
complete visual records of a historic setting captured before the photographic 
age. So, if you visit the palace and gardens this spring or summer, you can not 
only immerse yourself in Tudor history, but you can also get a rare chance to 
step back in time to Hampton Court in the Georgian age.

Discover Hampton Court as it once was, while enjoying the splendours of 
Hampton Court and its gardens today.

The Empress and the Gardener 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/304155071;133262059;s> is now open and runs 
till 4 September 2016.Admission is included as part of a palace, maze and 
gardens ticket at Hampton Court Palace.
