 Antonio Carluccio is responsible for saving us from a mundane mushroom diet. 
Foraging for wild mushrooms is his passion, which means that potentially, any 
promising looking forest can become an impromptu work space.
Brought up on the Amalfi coast and then Piedmont in Italy's wooded north west, 
Antonio started hunting for truffles and funghi with his father at the age of 
seven. Now youngsters here are as likely to throw porcini and shitake mushrooms 
into their shopping baskets as the button variety.

So thank you, Antonio Carluccio 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/antonio-carluccio>, for saving us, and 
for showing us the way of the mushroom!

When he's not searching for mushrooms, Carluccio is busy at home in Hampshire 
on his books, choosing to work by night, in longhand using a pencil.

"That's when all the ideas come to me," he explains. "Everything flows and I 
can concentrate." The only thing that might hinder his progress is a full moon. 
"I look at the full moon and start to cry. I don't know what it is but that's 
what happens."

Carluccio's other workspace is, as you might expect, his kitchen. It is here 
at home that he loves cooking polenta to a golden crisp in his favourite frying 
pan. For the rest of the time, he experiments with a wide range of recipes that 
may end up in his chain of Carluccio's Caffes.

"I describe myself as a cook, not a chef," he says. "A chef learns his trade 
in a school or a restaurant. If later, with his creative mind, he develops a 
passion, then he becomes a better chef. Otherwise he's a chef, just doing a 
job. A cook is somebody who learns through experience. He brings something more 
to cooking. I believe I am a cook."

His first cafe opened in Market Place near Oxford Circus in 1999 and the chain 
has spread to St Albans, Bicester and Tunbridge Wells.

"Freedom is the best thing you can expect when you go into a cafe," he says. 
"In most of the places you visit you don't have the freedom. The pleasure lies 
in going somewhere and feeling comfortable."

The "comfort is freedom" atmosphere that is evident in all his cafes is 
largely down to the design philosophy of his wife Priscilla.

"The ideas for the food and the recipes are mine. The appearance and ambience 
of the cafes come from Priscilla. Sometimes people are congratulating me and I 
have to say 'It's Priscilla'.

"The main thinking behind my cafes is that there is something for everyone," 
he says.

And in Carluccio's in the Bond Street department store Fenwicks, one of his 
many work spaces, as if to prove his point, there is an eclectic mix of 
business people with laptops, mothers with buggies and ladies who lunch. A 
large table provides space for sharing work, food and relaxation.

When Antonio visits one his cafes, he admits he is on the lookout for things 
that don't reflect the ethos of his comfort and freedom philosophy. "You can 
sample it instantly by the way our staff smile. The smile has to come from a 
goodness inside; this is what gives our diners so much pleasure."
· The Complete Mushroom Book by Antonio Carluccio is published by Quadrille.
