
This might sound strange coming from a chef but good food in a restaurant is 
not enough – you need smiling waiters, you need good company, you need ambience.

For this meal, I’d have bouillabaisse. There’s a bouillabaisse place that 
Claire, my wife, and I often go to in Cap d’Antibes, called the Restaurant de 
Bacon. Last time we went for lunch, there was an old guy and a lady a little 
younger than him at the next table. They started to sing songs, not loudly, but 
they were having fun. When they’d finished, the lady got up to leave, and the 
old guy put his hand on her bottom before following her out. I thought “Ah, 
they’re going to have a nice afternoon.” The waiter afterwards told me the lady 
was in her 70s and the guy was 96! Life is beautiful …

I have a lot of favourite dishes, but a good bouillabaisse is exceptional. 
It’s not something you eat on a rainy day. It has to be in Provence, sitting 
outside under a canopy of vine leaves, or at least on a terrace. And you have 
to have the whole day in front of you. First you eat the soup, and then the 
fish, it’s a whole meal in one dish. The saffron, the garlic, the rouille 
–everything about it reflects the sun.

Related: Homecoming: Dan Doherty’s final meal | My Last Supper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/03/dan-doherty-my-last-supper-mums-sunday-roast-dinner>

I can do a very good bouillabaisse. I used to do it often, although the 
problem in London is finding the right fish – rascasse, vive, and the little 
fish you need for the soup … Claire would be with me, friends, and my team.

I’d want my grandmother Camille’s croustade aux pommes for dessert. You start 
with a layer of pastry rolled so thin that you can read the newspaper through 
it, as she liked to say. You put a bit of butter and sugar on it, then another 
layer of pastry, butter and sugar – three times. In the middle go the apples 
with sugar, butter and Armagnac, and then you top it all with the rest of the 
pastry all scrunched up, a sprinkling of sugar, a little more butter, and it’s 
into the oven. As soon as it’s done, you drizzle it with honey. Oh, it’s 
perfect.

Camille taught me how to cook. Every chef learns a lot from their grandmother. 
She was apaysanne and, as a child, I spent all my holidays with her on the farm.

Of course, we’d have a nice bottle of wine. A burgundy or a Côtes du Rhône. A 
Bâtard-Montrachet, a bit extravagant maybe. With the croustade, we would have a 
Château d’Yquem.



•Pierre Koffmann will be at Taste of London, 15-19 June at Regent’s Park; 
tasteoflondon.co.uk; @PierreKoffmann 
<https://twitter.com/pierrekoffmann?lang=en-gb>
