
My day usually starts about 6am, a quick shower, breakfast and then the drive 
to the office with my partner Simon and my dog Lilly. The drive in is a great 
opportunity to talk strategy and plans for the day.

I own, run and am the registered manager at ClarkeCare 
<http://www.clarkecare.co.uk/>, a specialist homecare provider. We run a range 
of services, from rehabilitation support for people recovering from acute 
illness or surgery, to palliative care.

Today I first have a care call with a client whose usual care professional 
assistant (CPA) is unwell. I drop Simon and Lilly at the office then go to my 
client’s home. This lady has dementia and requires support to take her 
medications, prepare her breakfast, lunch and tea-time snack. I have an hour 
for the care call, which gives me time to sit and chat with her about her 
grandchildren whom she loves to show me photos of each time I visit.

Related: Want to write for us about working in social care? This is how 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/aug/14/write-about-working-in-social-care>

Each day can bring a different routine so there’s not so much a typical 
morning. Today when I get back to the office, I grab a coffee and log on to my 
email. I have a quick play with Lilly, who then sits quietly in her bed under 
my desk until I take her for a walk at lunch time. 

Most mornings when we all get into the office, Simon, Karen (care manager), 
Debbie (deputy care manager) and I briefly discuss our clients and any staff 
issues before we start our day. We hold a weekly meeting while standing up 
(everyone standing up keeps things brief), where we review the business and 
check if there have been any complaints, errors, health and safety concerns and 
so on. We review previous week’s actions, then plan the key actions for the 
rest of the week. We are regulated by theCare Quality Commission 
<http://www.cqc.org.uk/> and need to be sure that everything we do in the 
business meets its standards. As I write, we are expecting our first inspection.

Lunch is always a bit hit and miss. I sit at my desk and do emails while 
having my soup and then Lilly gives me that look so we go off for a brisk walk 
around the block. It’s been great having Lilly at work with me, she makes me 
step away from the desk for 20 minutes and she brings so much fun into the 
office when she wants to play. I can highly recommend taking your dog to work 
if you can. 

Before starting my business, I was a social worker in the local authority. I 
worked alongside care agencies and witnessed some good and some very bad 
practice. I saw carers being treated without respect for what they do and paid 
poorly.

As a social worker, I had reached a point where I was frustrated by not being 
able to progress my career, or support people in the way in which I felt they 
deserved to be supported. I had little autonomy to work in a way that I felt 
was real social work. I worked with some fantastic people who do some amazing 
work but it was time to make a bold step forward and leave my full-time job for 
the crazy world of owning and running a care agency. 

I decided that setting up my own care agency was where I could do my best 
work. I can support the clients to get the best possible care and support, plus 
I can ensure that the staff supporting them are well trained, feel valued and 
respected for the fantastic job they do day in day out.

Related: Every day I battle to get proper care for people with learning 
disabilities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jan/23/learning-disability-bulimia-not-priority>

There are many challenges in the social care world. The obvious one to me now 
is the lack of funding to support new care providers to train their staff well 
and shadow their staff until they are competent, safe workers. We pay for all 
the care professional assistants’ training and shadow them until they are 
competent and confident to do their job well. This makes a large dent in the 
start-up funds but I think it’s essential if you’re going to develop good, 
caring, competent CPAs to deliver the sort of care you would expect for your 
loved ones.

I try to leave work around 6-6.30pm, but today I stayed late to get letters 
sent to recent job applicants. Bedtime is when I shut my eyes and try to switch 
off from work, however, if that’s a problem, I play music to send me off. Rick 
Astley works every time.

It’s a wonderful job and I have no regrets of leaving the local authority. My 
fantastic team are making a real difference to our clients’ lives and that’s 
what I believe real social work should be all about.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, email socialcare@theguardian.com.

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free 
–online here <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.
