
The panelists were:

 * Dr Gleider Hernández, senior lecturer in public international law and 
director of undergraduate admissions at Durham University’s law school. 
 * Richard Hodgson, a banking and graduate recruitment partner at Linklaters. 
 * Tom Hingley, a trainee solicitor at Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer.

 * Rebecca Loveridge, a junior barrister specialising in domestic and 
international commercial disputes. 
 * Stuart Cribb, a junior barrister specialising in international commercial 
litigation and arbitration. 
 * Tina Schaeffer, a qualified solicitor and A-level law teacher at Woodhouse 
College, a sixth-form college in north London. 
 * Anne Petrie, a manager of the careers team at The University of Law. 
What A-level subjects should I study if I want to go into law?

Dr Gleider Hernández: Any subjects. Although general studies isn’t usually 
considered an appropriate A-level. At Durham, we ascribe no preference to an 
A-level in law.

Tom Hingley: I studied PE, politics and geography to A2 level. Those choices 
continue to raise eyebrows when I tell people. Although they are perhaps not 
the most advisable choices, I’m proof that it’s less about what you study and 
more about how you present yourself.

Related: What do you need for a career in law? – live Q&A 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/22/law-students-live-chat> 

What non-academic things should I do if I want to study law at university and 
have a law career afterwards?

Tina Schaeffer: Until you’ve started studying, you won’t know what area of law 
you want to be in – even if you think you do. So try to see both criminal and 
civil law in action by visiting some courts.

Stuart Cribb: Enjoy your summer holidays – if you want to become a lawyer, 
you’ll probably spend a lot of your university holidays doing vac schemes, mini 
pupillages and interviews anyway, so there’s plenty of time for that later.

Richard Hodgson: Work experience. The profession encompasses many different 
types of work, areas of law and methods of practice. The more exposure you can 
get to the various options, the better informed you’ll be about which path 
interests you most.

Am I disadvantaged if I don’t study law, and instead do the GDL conversion 
course after university?

Rebecca Loveridge: No. At Fountain Court, plenty of barristers have gone down 
each route. Only study law as a degree if you think you’re going to enjoy it. I 
thoroughly enjoyed studying law, but if you have an interest in a different 
subject then go for it.

Tom Hingley: Just under half of Freshfields trainees didn’t study law and it 
would be difficult for me to tell them apart. You do so much learning on the 
job, or in training organised by the firm, that the academic law you studied – 
or not – at university feels like a long time ago.

Stuart Cribb: The cost of the GDL is high and scholarships are very 
competitive. The GDL also sucks a lot of the joy out of studying law. There’s 
no time to develop a legal interest on the GDL, or for much critical reflection 
on what you’re studying. But as far as I know, most firms of solicitors and 
barristers’ chambers don’t mind which route candidates took.

How important are elective subject choices during a law degree?

Rebecca Loveridge: They show what you’re really interested in – if you chose 
crime and criminology, for example, and then applied for a commercial law job 
it would invite questions. But I still think you should take subjects you 
genuinely find interesting. If you don’t want to take a particular subject at 
university, it’s unlikely that you’ll enjoy practising in that field.

Stuart Cribb: I’ve found the content of my elective subject choices very 
useful in practice. I picked subjects that match my professional ambitions, 
which allowed me to develop a solid understanding of those areas.

Tom Hingley: A first class degree, having done electives that interest you, is 
better than a 2:1 or a 2:2 doing electives you think employers will like. My 
work now is so far removed from the academic work I did at university that it 
makes no difference that I chose to do human rights law instead of, say, 
corporate law in my third year.

What are the most important qualities and skills that recruiters in the legal 
profession look for?

Rebecca Loveridge: Strong academic results are important as a barrister, and 
most are self-employed, so you need to demonstrate self-motivation. Attention 
to detail is also very important, so make sure you thoroughly check your 
application form before sending it in.

Stuart Cribb: Strong legal analysis, research skills and attention to detail 
are the backbone of my working life. In all aspects of the profession you need 
to be an effective communicator – be that in your written arguments, oral 
advocacy or when dealing with clients.

Richard Hodgson: You need to be able to excel in a team environment and be 
commercially aware as a commercial lawyer – understand commercial problems and 
what motivates clients.

Tom Hingley: Show the interviewer that you’re someone they’d be willing to 
work long hours alongside. Commercial awareness, attention to detail and 
academic requirements are met by many candidates, so a lot ends up coming down 
to attitude.

Dr Gleider Hernández: As a lawyer in the public sector you need to be a 
critical thinker and be able to research problems quickly and proactively. You 
need tenacity under pressure and to be able to change your mind when faced with 
new evidence or a change in circumstances.

How can I increase my chances of getting a training contract if I haven’t 
completed a vacation scheme?

Anne Petrie: It’s not the end of the world if you can’t get onto a vacation 
scheme. Write to firms and in-house organisations asking about work shadowing 
placements or more informal work experience. Send a well-written CV and 
covering letter that shows you’ve researched them thoroughly.

Related: Why we must raise the bar to becoming a barrister 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/dec/18/why-we-must-raise-the-bar-to-becoming-a-barrister>

Tom Hingley: It’s arguably tougher to get onto a vacation scheme than a 
training contract because candidates can do multiple vacation schemes, so don’t 
feel disheartened if you haven’t completed one. Many of the same benefits can 
be had through working a real job or even travel. See a free summer as an 
opportunity to show some initiative and create tales to tell in interviews.

How can I gain commercial experience if I haven’t completed a vacation scheme?

Richard Hodgson: There are lots of ways. These include volunteering or doing 
pro bono work at a local law firm or legal clinic. You can write to local law 
firms or businesses – which don’t offer formal vacation schemes – and ask if 
you can do an internship. Follow commercial news stories. You’ll start to form 
your own views and be able to talk about them in an interview environment.

Anne Petrie: Part-time jobs and work experience in leisure, retail, 
hospitality will help if you see them from a commercial angle. If you’re at 
university, take part in simulated business games and attend employer 
presentations or workshops, as some will focus on commercial awareness.

As a student with international qualifications, how should I approach 
applications to UK law firms for training contracts?

Richard Hodgson: We regularly recruit candidates with overseas qualifications. 
The best way to approach applications is by drawing out your unique experience 
and articulating how this brings you to your desire to build a career in law, 
in particular commercial law in the city, if that’s your goal.

Related: Why every aspiring lawyer should study human rights law 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/feb/09/students-why-study-human-rights-law>

Tom Hingley: The people who deal with applications sift through so many that 
the non-conventional will catch their eye. Enjoy your time at university. Study 
and do what interests you, rather than just seeking to tick various boxes, such 
as legal work experience, article writing, and mooting. As fantastic as those 
things are, they’re no substitute for being able to sit in an interview and 
talk about a topic, event, or experience with true enthusiasm.

I want to become a lawyer but have no qualifications – what should I do?

Richard Hodgson: It’s tough. Perhaps start with getting some experience to 
confirm that you do want to pursue a route into a career in law. Also, remember 
that some roles in the legal sector don’t require a degree, such as being a 
paralegal.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
