
His story: Alastair Campbell, 57, author, broadcaster and political strategist

I first knew Paul when, as a teenage fan falling in love with the game, I 
watched him play and I thought he was a terrific footballer [Fletcher scored 71 
goals in 293 appearances for Burnley]. After he retired he moved into the 
business of football stadia and then became chief executive of Burnley. We 
always, always, always have a laugh and he always, always, always takes the 
piss out of me.

He just compèred my book launch and the first thing he said was: “I’ve been 
doing some research and talking to your missus and your kids and what the 
audience want to know is: ‘Why do you always wear women’s clothes at home?’” 
That’s the juvenile level of his humour, but Fletch is actually also a very 
thoughtful guy.

He’s very thoughtful about football, he’s one of the few players who has gone 
into business afterwards. He has a tattoo saying All You Need Is Love on his 
arse. Don’t ask how I know that. We don’t talk about politics much. When I was 
high profile, he might say: “Oh, you’ve had a bit of a rough week.”

We talk about more personal stuff – our shared love of musicals, or my 
depression. Paul is one of those infectious people who lifts your mood. He’s a 
joker, but with huge emotional intelligence and when I’m going to a football 
match, part of the escape is meeting up with him and his grandson, Morgan.

The thing Fletch always brings up is me banging on about the time I played 
with Pelé, but Pelé actually only managed a team I played in. The real story is 
that I played in a game with Maradona. I passed it to him and he passed it 
back. That’s better than anything Paul Fletcher has ever done.

His story: Paul Fletcher, 64, MD, University College of Football Business

Most Premier League teams have film stars who are their club’s most famous 
supporters, but Alastair is Burnley’s highest-profile fan so the directors used 
to invite him into the boardroom. I was aware of him before that and I thought 
he’d be a real boring fart, but he wasn’t.

He is very down to earth, very much one of the boys and we struck up an 
immediate friendship. I would take the mickey out of him and he would take the 
mickey out of me. He’s one of those fans who would love to have been a player. 
He’s always talking about playing with Eusébio and Pelé, but Pelé was about 73 
when that happened, and Alastair was only about 42 so they were about equal 
then.

I never see that Malcolm Tucker <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malcolm_Tucker> 
side of him. There must be a tough Alastair Campbell somewhere, but we at 
Burnley Football Club don’t see it. He is well liked here. We’ve both been in 
stressful jobs where you’re accountable to thousands – in Alastair’s case 
millions – and you need a humour valve. Hopefully I can provide that when he 
needs to escape London’s pressures and his mental-health problems.

We never seriously talk politics or religion, but if we do disagree it’s a bit 
like me and the wife. I’m right and he’s wrong. We’ll have a bit of banter 
about David Cameron and Ed Miliband, but he’ll never persuade me to wear a red 
scarf as I’m a Conservative voter. Even though he’s used to standing in the 
pulpit and giving his sermons I’m normally correct. He’ll end up saying: “You 
know, Fletch, you were right and I was wrong.” I admire him for that.

Alastair Campbell’s Winners: And How They Succeed is out now. To order a copy 
for £11.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/winning-251964.html>

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
