
Proposals to raise nearly £200m by increasing court fees have been condemned 
as "not fit for purpose" by aninternal government review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/impact-assessment-opinion-enhanced-court-fees>
 in a highly unusual, public rebuke of the Ministry of Justice (MoJ).

The Regulatory Policy Committee (RPC), an independent advisory body , has 
issued a scathing analysis of plans backed by the justice secretary,Chris 
Grayling <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>. The assessment 
comes in a rare RPC "red report".

The MoJ impact assessment of "enhanced court fees" was published last month. 
The changes involve raising the costs of obtaining a divorce and other civil 
claims in an attempt to generate an extra £190m a year in income for Her 
Majesty's Courts and Tribunal Service (HMCTS).

Last year the then lord chief justice, Lord Judge, warned about the dangers of 
undermining independence of the judiciary 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/jun/24/lord-chief-justice-grayling-warning>
through privatising the courts service, making it self-financing or introducing 
cross-subsidising of one section of the court service by another.

The RPC report, published on the government's own website this week, declares: 
"The [MoJ's] impact assessment] is not fit for purpose. The department needs to 
make clear whether the proposal will result in the court service raising more 
funds than is necessary to cover their costs."

The committee's reports are colour-coded: green, amber and red. Red reports 
are normally withdrawn once the department adjusts its plans. Publication of a 
red notice is rare: only 12 have been issued in the past three years, and they 
often lead to departments revising their proposals.

In its notice, the committee says: "The proposed change is intended to 
increase the fees charged to some users of the civil and family courts system 
beyond the level necessary to recover costs. This would produce additional 
revenue to fund other areas of the civil and family courts system.

"The impact assessment lacked clarity. The Ministry of Justice has not 
explained sufficiently the outcome the proposal is intended to achieve – 
whether the proposal will result in the court service generating an adequate 
level of revenue to meet its costs, or whether a surplus will be generated."

The committee's report describes some of the department's proposals as being 
"without any supporting evidence or discussion of the risk".

The report is an embarrassment for Grayling, who has promised to deliver large 
savings from his department but is also engaged in a protracted row with the 
legal profession over separate plans to slice £220m out of the annual criminal 
legal aid bill.

As well as potentially limiting Grayling's room for financial manoeuvre, the 
RPC's criticism may resonate with opponents of the justice secretary who have 
accused him of producing plans that need repeated revision and lack sufficient 
evidence.

The RPC specialises in reviewing government-produced impact assessments to 
ensure that the evidence for new policies is sufficient to support new 
legislative initiatives.

The MoJ's courts minister, Shailesh Vara, said: "We have the best court

system in the world, and we must make sure it is properly funded so we keep

it that way.

"Hardworking taxpayers should not have to subsidise millionaires embroiled

in long cases fighting over vast amounts of money, and we are redressing

that balance.

"Vulnerable groups must also be protected, which is why we are keeping the

fees the same for sensitive family issues, including adoption applications

and child contact, and scrapping the application fee for victims of domestic

violence seeking injunctions to protect themselves."
