
Nearly half of academy trusts have paid millions of poundsin public money 
towards the private businesses of directors, trustees and their relatives, 
Whitehall’s spending watchdog has disclosed.

The National Audit Office says 976 academy trusts – 43% of those examined – 
disclosed “related party transactions” in 2013 worth an estimated £71m. Almost 
£9m of this money posed a risk to public money, it added. Margaret Hodge, the 
chair of the public accounts committee which will question education officials 
about the figures, said the Education Funding Agency (EFA), which oversees the 
finances of academies, needed to get a grip of these “dubious” relationships.

“Related party transactions are a big issue … I am very concerned that the 
agency’s reliance on whistleblowers and ad hoc reports means that many more 
questionable business relationships could exist and have gone unchallenged, 
putting public money at risk.

“Given its track record, I have little confidence that the agency will know if 
academies are complying with its new guidance on dealing with related party 
transactions,” she said.

The new figures have emerged after the EFA reviewed the financial statements 
of all academy trusts to identify contentious transactions such as related 
party transactions – defined as “a transfer of assets or liabilities or the 
performance of services by, to, or for a related party”.

The auditors’ report found that in 2012-13, out of a total of 2,256 academy 
trust financial statements that the agency reviewed, 976 disclosed “related 
party transactions”.

Of academies’ £11,467m expenditure that year, an estimated £71m was recorded 
as “related party transactions”. Of these, £8.6m was assessed by the agency as 
posing a risk to value for money and required further work.

The report was sparked by inquiries into alleged irregularities and potential 
conflicts of interest at the Durand academy in south London.

The school has become a favourite among traditionalists because it offers a 
public school boarding education to inner-city children 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jun/17/boarding-academy-school-for-state-pupils>
, many of whom are from minority ethnic backgrounds.

Auditors examined the EFA’s oversight of Durand and identified possible 
conflicts of interest for the purchase of legal services from a company where a 
Durand governor was the company secretary.

The structures of the Durand Academy Trust and related organisations were so 
complex and involved many of the same officers, the auditors found, resulting 
in a large number of conflicts of interests.

Hodge said: “It feels just wrong that individuals sitting on the board of the 
Durand Academy Trust could set up such a complex web of organisations and 
companies some of which are selling goods and services to the academy. It’s not 
at all clear if individuals within the trust were improperly benefiting from 
these companies.”

Earlier this year, the Guardian disclosed  
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/12/taxpayer-funded-academy-paying-millions-private-firms-schools-education-revealed-education>
that payments to academy chains have been made for a wide range of services 
including consultancy fees, curriculums, IT advice and equipment, travel, 
expenses and legal advice.

The report also disclosed that Sir Greg Martin, executive head of Durand, saw 
his wage packet, including pension contributions, increase to a total of 
£229,138 in 2013.

It added that the EFA was planning to undertake a review of academy heads’ 
salaries, but had yet to finalise the scope of this.

A spokesperson for the Durand trust said the arrangements the NAO looked into 
had delivered significant benefits for pupils and were established in good 
faith.

“We agreed with the EFA to review our structures and governance six months 
ago, so that we remain in line with the very latest edition of theAcademies 
Financial Handbook 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/academies-financial-handbook>. As 
the NAO’s report confirms on Thursday, many of the changes we instigated back 
then are already complete, or under way and nearing completion,” the 
spokesperson said.

• This article was amended on 13 November 2014. An earlier version referred to 
971 academy trusts where it should have said 976; the incorrect figure came 
from a National Audit Office statement, the wrong version of which was sent to 
us.
