
Most bobbies remember their first arrest. It’s normally under the careful eye 
of their tutor – like a child in a school play who has their lines fed to them 
by a teacher when they falter – and it’s usually for something mundane and 
stupid. We soon realise that most of our arrests will be for mundane, stupid 
things, but that first arrest feels like a stepping stone, a rite of passage to 
better things, and that’s why we remember it. It’s like the first time you fall 
in love, only smellier and more aggressive.

Mine was Jonathan. Jonathan was 12 and had been reported missing from his 
secure care home. He was also wanted on warrant because he hadn’t turned up at 
court. Jonathan, who had been in trouble for theft, burglary and drug use, 
didn’t like going to court. I was in my first week of being tutored, and I’d 
had three days, one hour and 15 minutes on the streets before my tutor and I 
came across a group of kids messing about on a local industrial estate.

I remember wondering what kind of mother turns her back on her own child like 
that

We spoke to them on the perfectly reasonable subject of why they weren’t in 
school, and one seemed shifter than the others. I mean, I didn’t notice it, but 
my tutor told me, and said that she thought it was young Jonathan. As I got out 
of the car to speak to him, he went off like a rocket. So I gave chase, radio 
in hand.

After about 10 seconds, I had to stop, backpedal and pick up the battery from 
my radio. The catches on the handset, notoriously old and worn, were pretty 
loose, and I learned the hard way that a little masking tape every morning 
works wonders. Battery duly reattached, the chase recommenced. I presume my 
tutor was calling it in, but even after my self-induced radio blackspot was 
over, frankly I wouldn’t have noticed an observation message for the four 
horsemen of the apocalypse, I was that focused on catching Jonathan.

Rocket or not, he was only 12 and had short legs. I was in my mid-20s at the 
time and ran a lot, so I soon collared him. I started reciting the caution as I 
got a grip on him, though he probably knew it better than me at that point. I’m 
not sure what reply I was expecting, but it was impressively offensive.

The second shock of the day was ringing Jonathan’s mother to ask her to come 
out and be his appropriate adult, and hearing: “You’re new, aren’t you?” I was 
diagnosed over the phone with unerring accuracy. She proceeded to tell me she 
wouldn’t come out, that we could throw the little shit in the deepest darkest 
dungeon we had as far as she was concerned. So we rang his social worker, who 
was just as unsurprised as mum, but more helpful at least.

Related: If the police don't get to you straight away, it's not because we 
don't care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/16/police-controller-999-call-danger-officers>

I remember wondering what kind of mother turns her back on her own child like 
that but, conscious of the fact I knew nothing of this strange new world, I 
said nothing. With the benefit of hindsight, although I doubt her parenting 
skills were perfect, I think she had reached the point where no effort she put 
in on his behalf made the slightest bit of difference. She had other kids to 
look after and I had clearly spoken to her after she had shut the door on 
Jonathan in order to save and protect everything else. The fact that when we 
printed out his precons (previous convictions) for the court file on fanfold 
paper, it stretched all the way across the office floor and halfway back again, 
speaks volumes about why she must have felt this way.

I was single at the time; now I’m married and have two kids of my own, who I 
am immensely proud of for their achievements and their selfless, caring ways. I 
don’t doubt that Jonathan’s mum felt crushed, whatever she said to me on the 
phone, so I don’t judge her choices.

Whatever his minus points, and they were plenty, Jonathan wasn’t stupid. He 
played a very good game of chess. When he was on constant watch in the cells 
(where an officer sits by your open cell door to stop you doing anything silly 
to yourself) he would play chess with any officer who knew how to play, and I 
never knew him to lose. I have occasionally seen Jonathan’s name come up since, 
and at the time of writing he is halfway through a 12-year stretch for a series 
of violent burglaries for high-performance cars. I hope he does change, though 
I suspect he never will.

Wherever he ends up, I wish him well.

This is an edited version of a blog that originally appeared here 
<https://unitwhenfree.wordpress.com/>.


This series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contacttamsin.rutter@theguardian.com <mailto:tamsin.rutter@theguardian.com>.


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
