 The relationship between Clare Short and the Labour party hit a new low today, 
after the former international development secretary resigned the Labour whip.
The outspoken ex-cabinet minister told Sky News that she was resigning because 
the House of Commons was "weak" and too much power was "concentrated in No 10".

She said that her decision was influenced by a series of rebukes from the 
chief whip, Jacqui Smith.

"I was reflecting the views of the country and she tells me I can't say it," 
Ms Short said.

"What could I do? I've only got a couple of years left in parliament; I want 
to be able to speak the truth as I see it."

In a statement, Ms Smith said: "It is a shame that, following my reprimand to 
her for advocating the defeat of her Labour colleagues at the next election and 
several recent warnings about her lack of attendance, she has decided to resign 
theLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> whip."

But she noted Ms Short's "contributions to the Labour party and government".

The move comes as the latest in a long line of disagreements between Ms Short 
and the party.

Since 2003, she has been at odds with the government over her opposition to 
the war in Iraq, which led to her quitting the cabinet.

Since leaving the cabinet she has become a frequent critic of the prime 
minister.

Last month Ms Short, 60, announced that she would resign at the next election 
and campaign for a hung parliament because she was "profoundly ashamed" of the 
Labour government.

In an article in the Independent, Ms Short said that New Labour was arrogant, 
lacked principle and displayed "incredible" incompetence.

She wrote that the future of British politics should be a hung parliament 
which would encourage electoral reform and said that Labour should hold a third 
of the seats, the Tories a third and the rest should be made up of Greens and 
other parties.

Ms Smith retaliated on that occasion by referring her conduct to the party 
chair and the general secretary.

In her resignation letter to Ms Smith, dated yesterday, Ms Short said that she 
wished to become an "independent Labour MP" and remained "a convinced social 
democrat".

"It is my view that our political system is in trouble and that the 
exaggerated majorities in the House of Commons have led to an abject parliament 
and a concentration of power in No 10 that has produced arrogant, error-prone 
government," the letter reads.

It also accuses Ms Smith of attempting to stop Ms Short criticising Tony 
Blair's "series of half-truths and deceits to get us to war in Iraq".

"In the circumstances I think the best way to ensure that I can put forward my 
views for my remaining time in parliament is for me to resign the whip.

"I will therefore sit in the House of Commons as an independent Labour MP."

Ms Short's decision received a mixed reception from some of her colleagues.

Peter Kilfoyle, who resigned as a defence minister over the war in Iraq, said: 
"I am sad she has chosen to resign. I would ask what she hopes to achieve by 
resigning.

"No matter how strongly you feel about issues, you should stay inside the 
party and fight your cause.

"She voted for the war, and I never understood the logic of voting for the war 
and then resigning from the cabinet. I do not understand why she has taken the 
line she has."

Gordon Brown, the chancellor, said he had not heard about Ms Short's 
resignation, but added: "If she's made that announcement, well, it's been known 
for some time she wasn't voting with the Labour whip."

Lord Foulkes, the Labour peer who was her deputy at the Department for 
International Development, commented: "I always thought this was inevitable. It 
is a bit like the final act of a modern Greek tragedy.

"I am sad in many ways because she was very kind to me.

"Her great achievements at the Department for International Development have 
been overshadowed by the manner of her resignation, when she first clung on to 
her job and voted for the war and then was forced to resign."

Lord Foulkes spoke of her "bitterness verging on hatred" towards Tony Blair 
and the Labour party.

"That was totally unjustified because she would not have been able to do what 
she did in the Department for International Development without Blair's support.

"The prime minister gave us a completely free rein. He also saved her career 
as an MP. "She was threatened twice with deselection by her local constituency 
party. It was Blair's intervention that kept her on."

Ms Short had a 6,801 majority in her Birmingham Ladywood seat last year, but 
suffered from a 20% swing to the Liberal Democrats.

She said she was standing down so that she could speak the truth, but did not 
completely rule out standing as an independent candidate, despite 23 years as a 
Labour MP.

Ms Smith also criticised Ms Short for announcing her decision "through a leak 
to the media rather than to her constituency Labour party". Ms Short denies 
that.
