
There comes a time in every surfer's life when he still thinks he's (legendary 
former world champ) Kelly Slater, but it's actually all gone a bit Nigel 
Slater. This thought occurs to me as I'm hoisting the bodyboard-sized caramel 
twirl off the top of the chocolate fondant shortly after polishing off a 
40-hour-braised rump steak, cancelling all the benefits of a day's wave-riding 
in one calorific wipeout.

John Malmqvist, the former Swedish national surfing champion who has provided 
this feast, agrees that priorities change. "When I lived on the Gold Coast in 
Australia, after a day's surfing I'd have been happy to dig a hole in the sand 
and sleep there," he says, "But these days, I want a nice bed."

He's sitting at a bar made of old boats, behind the floor-to-ceiling windows 
of the Surfers Lodge he opened a month ago, just outside the town of Peniche, 
about 100km north of Lisbon. Certain there was a market for boutique surf 
accommodation a step up from the tatty dorms and beach huts surfers tend to 
doss in, Malmqvist convinced a pair of Swedish investors to help with the 
finance – this sharp-looking, wood-clad tricorn of a hotel is the result.

Part of me bridles, though. Isn't this kind of lifestyle makeover a betrayal 
of surfing's beach-bum origins? As I browse the lodge's website, with its spiel 
about going "beyond classic", or stick my head around the door of the Bali 
suite, and clock the muslin-draped four-poster and lava-rock bathtub, I fear 
the worst.

Wouldn't Jeff Spicoli (the surfer dude played by Sean Penn in Fast Times at 
Ridgemont High) be choking on his bong? Won't the pristine roof jacuzzi and 
cushion-lined Moroccan roof terrace get in the way of communing with those 
waves? The three gruff-looking thirtysomething Swedish surfers at breakfast 
next morning are obviously assuaging their doubts at the cured-meat, fruit and 
patisserie buffet.
 The rooftop at Surfers Lodge 
Luckily, my Zen pretensions are given a leg up by my airline leaving my 
backpack at Heathrow, stripping me of all worldly possessions for most of my 
stay. Butt-naked under a borrowed wetsuit, I hit the beach at 10am with 
irrepressible Surfers Lodge instructor Marlene and two fellow pupils.

The lodge holds two 90-minute group lessons a day and, having never had 
tuition, I opt to go back to basics with the beginners. There's a heavier reef 
break behind the lodge, but Prainha ("little beach"), a tight yellow 
welcome-mat of a cove more suitable for our purposes, is a 10-minute walk down 
the road. Peniche is a scrappy, industrial fishing port, but its location – a 
silted-up island-turned-peninsula with a full gamut of breaks that can handle 
virtually any combination of swell or wind conditions, and provide for any 
ability level – has made it a European surf haven. TheASP surfing world tour 
<http://www.aspworldtour.com/events> comes here, waiting for the world-famous 
Supertubes to crank into action every October.

My entry form will have to wait. Marlene quickly identifies that my take-off – 
where you get into riding stance – is all wrong. What should be a fluid sweep 
through from the back foot is, in my case, a jerky marionette's effort 
resembling Rodin's The Thinker. Time to unlearn what I have learned. But it's 
frustrating wobbling around on the foam, and I get impatient for proper waves. 
Without my contact lenses, the rugged peaks of swell coursing across the 4km 
bay are a blur. Heading for the blue stuff, not the yellow, is the best I can 
manage.

I take solace later in the fondant, and plenty of beer. My back aches – more 
from theLodge's morning yoga class <http://www.yogacenterpeniche.com/> than the 
surf – and that walk-in shower, finished in the same treated concrete as much 
of the hotel, looks mighty appealing. The aesthetic is post-industrial, but 
there are homespun, almost quaint, touches in the 17 rooms: hemp sofas, 
lampstands made of driftwood, a misshapen Life Aquatic mural in the hallway. A 
hoopoe flies past the roof terrace as I watch the sun bleed over the horizon. 
Maybe I need to bin that surfing asceticism.
 The lodge's living room 
Malmqvist's venture had its own philosophical hurdles to overcome. He 
struggled to persuade his original investor, his father Lars, of the demand for 
deluxe surfers' accommodation: "Then he [dad] went to a Swedish-run surf camp 
in Costa Rica and understood what it was all about. He realised surfing was 
going through what happened to skiing in the 1980s."

Malmqvist Sr, who has done interiors for the Kempinski Hotel chain, ended up 
working on the lodge, too. Since the place was built, further tweaks have been 
made. Malmqvist recently dispensed with the original chef and replaced an 
all-Scandinavian menu with more hearty food, like gourmet burgers, better 
suited to most surfers' carb-heavy appetite. Despite the high-end USP that 
netted him an EU grant, Malmqvist seems wary of alienating the traditional 
surfers' demographic.

With his Mads Mikkelsen overbite and nautical cap, the 35-year-old cuts an 
endearing, curious figure as lolls around his lodge with his friends, like a 
surfing Gatsby. He almost seems a bit lost, leaving the detail of running the 
place to his Portuguese manager, Roberto. He talks about the importance of 
zeroing in on the right clientele, but in the same breath says he's not in it 
for the cash.

His attitude mirrors the growing pains of surfing as it expands from its 
original alternative base into the mainstream, while fretting about losing its 
soul. The town of Peniche – and Baleal, the outlying, more hippyish village 
where the lodge is – are on the brink of an explosion and ringed with building 
sites. Where there were three surf camps, now there are at least 10. "Everybody 
wants a piece of the cake," a local tells me later.

I commit further surfing heresy the following evening by attending a wine 
tasting: another part of Malmqvist's drive upmarket. We're offered an 
extraordinaryprocession of historic Portuguese wines 
<http://secretwinesofportugal.com/> by microbiologist and wine designer 
Virgílio Loureiro.
 Alfresco breakfast at the lodge 
I think it is as I am washing down a lump of Portuguese black pudding with a 
milky-textured medieval red wine dubbed "the blood of Satan" that I realise I 
am truly sold on the lodge, and the level of bespoke care that has gone into 
every aspect.

The throng in the bar that evening is a promisingly broad church: sweatered 
Norwegian golfer guests, local couples, seasoned surfers in baseball caps, and 
even hot young beach-rats with a commendable middle-finger attitude. The lodge 
has found the sweet spot between the surfing hardcore and the squares – and the 
easy affability that emanates from Malmqvist should mark it out as more 
personal option than the "contemporary beach holidays" that target newly 
moneyed wave-riders in other surf hotspots.

You don't have to be a surfer to stay at the lodge, but those are the folk 
Malmqvist is aiming for – he prefers to take guests on full packages involving 
surf lessons. And the summer bookings diary is filling up: the Lisbon 
management consultant with whom I'd shared an intermediate lesson was a 
promising validation of his ideas about his target market.

I snatch a last session, my lenses now restored, and the swell drops to reveal 
a tidy rack of two-foot waves on an aquamarine ocean. A tern spear-fishes 
beyond the breakers. My take off is still crocked, but I take a couple of waves 
down the line. Just like the lodge, I'm striving to obey the first rule of 
surfing: no pressure.

• Accommodation was provided by Surfers Lodge Peniche (+351 262 700 030, 
surferslodgepeniche.com <http://surferslodgepeniche.com/>), which has doubles 
from €118 a night or twins from €49pp. A one-week surf package, staying in a 
suite, costs from €992.50pp including breakfast and five dinners, five days of 
surfing lessons, one yoga lesson and one massage. Flights were provided by TAP 
Portugal (0845 601 0932,flytap.com 
<http://www.flytap.com/UnitedKingdom/en/Homepage>), which has daily flights 
from Manchester, Heathrow and Gatwick to Lisbon, from £94 return, including 
taxes
