
Have you done Warwick? We went, didn’t we, darling, and loved it. OK, I know 
Coventry isn’t the most “OMG happening” place – is that the right word, 
darling? – on the planet, but the politics tutor was drop-dead gorgeous and the 
other parents were delightful. Did you talk to any of the students, Tom, what’s 
wrong with “gap yah”? I could completely see myself in the library, couldn’t I, 
Tom? And their graduate employment figures are amazing, of course: it’s right 
up there in the rankings – joint 48th – not that it matters!

Well, we looked at Leeds, but it’s so far away and I’ve never much cared for 
that accent, no, I’m sure your Jack would love it, that’s if he doesn’t mind 
the dreadful weather. Same with Edinburgh – we might have gone for Edinburgh, 
mightn’t we, Tom, even with the poor student satisfaction, except the rudeness 
when I put my hand up and asked about vegan kitchen arrangements! Tom can’t be 
the only one. On the plus side, stunning cathedral. That’s what I, sorry, we 
adored about Durham, wasn’t it, lovely evensongs for our long weekends, but the 
grades they want are ridiculous considering they’re number 61.

Have you been to St Andrews? Well, Tom wasn’t keen, they don’t seem to do the 
course he wants, but I told him, didn’t I, darling, that since his father and I 
will be paying through the nose, he might want to bear in mind it’s golfing 
heaven.

Related: Modern tribes: the Hiddlestoner 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/19/modern-tribes-the-hiddlestoner-tom-hiddleston>

If only they’d get Benedict Cumberbatch as a fellow, I’d be completely sold. 
Well, it’s his decision, but for me the right celebrity makes such a difference 
to the overall “vibe”. That’s why we’re tempted by Winchester, not just the 
cathedral – yes, I know Tom, you’re not going anywhere that chose Alan 
Titchmarsh for its public face, but really, if I’m paying £20,000 for the 
privilege, I’m all for a chancellor who knows something about herbaceous 
borders. That’s the trouble with Bath – the Earl of Wessex! I said to Tom, 
honestly, I think we can do a little better than a Wessex, didn’t I, Tom? Tom?
