
Raspberries are merry-making foods, I adore them and only have happy memories 
of plucking the little bobbly fruits from the bush in my nan’s garden as a 
child. I don’t usually do anything other than dollop some fresh cream on mine 
or eat them one by one off the tops of my fingers like a Hula Hoop crisp, so I 
was very excited to see so many suggestions for my favourite fruit.

The winning recipe: Cranachan ice-cream

Colonial Craving’s recipe has everything going for it. I had to make the 
crunchy oats twice as I scoffed half the first lot right out of the oven. I 
then licked the whiskey bowl clean and practically drank the raspberry puree. 
Combined and frozen, these three parts become a luxurious, creamy, boozy 
raspberry mess. I am smitten.

Serves 6 
3 tbsp honey
1 ½ tbsp light flavoured oil 
A pinch of salt
100g oats
150g raspberries (frozen is fine)
2 tbsp icing sugar
600ml double cream
350g condensed milk
50ml whisky

1 Preheat the oven to 160C/325F/gas mark 3. Put the honey, oil and a pinch of 
salt into a small pan and heat gently until melted and combined. Tip in the 
oats and stir to coat in the honey mix.

2 Transfer the oats to a baking tray – spread roughly into a single layer. 
Bake for 20-25 minutes, stirring frequently until the oats are golden brown and 
clumping together in parts. Remove from the oven and allow to cool.

3 To make the ripple, push the raspberries through a fine sieve to collect 
their pink juices, discarding the seeds. Stir the icing sugar into the juice 
and set aside.

4 Whip the cream to floppy peaks, pour in the condensed milk and whisky, then 
beat again until the mixture holds soft peaks. Fold in the crunchy oats, 
transfer to a freezer-proof container and ripple through the raspberry sauce. 
Freeze for at least 3 hours, or until frozen solid. Remove from the freezer 20 
minutes before serving.

Elderflower, raspberry and prosecco jelly

Prosecco jelly is my kind of jelly. Sharp, sweet and floral – Galina Varese is 
quite right – it’s the perfect host for sweet, ripe raspberries.

Makes 6 small or one large jelly 
250ml elderflower cordial
1 sachet of powdered gelatin 
320ml prosecco
75g raspberries
1 edible rose, petals removed

1 Heat the cordial over a medium heat until just below boiling point. Remove 
from the heat, add the gelatin and stir until dissolved. Transfer to a pouring 
jug.

2 Gradually add the prosecco to the jug and stir well. Drop 3-4 raspberries 
and rose petals (if using) into each of your serving glasses. Pour the prosecco 
mix on top. Chill for 2 hours, or until set.

Middle-Eastern tiramisu

The riper your raspberries the better this dessert from Shelley McAlister will 
be. You want them juicy and squashed amongst the creamy mascarpone. More trifle 
than traditional tiramisu, but whatever you call it, it’s delicious.

Serves 6 
1 large pomegranate, halved 
2 tbsp pomegranate molasses
1 tsp sumac 
85ml raspberry liquor or sweet sherry
36 sponge fingers
250g mascarpone
200ml creme fraiche
1 tbsp caster sugar 
1 tsp rosewater
150g raspberries 
200ml whipping cream

1 Use the back of a wooden spoon to bash out the seeds of the pomegranate. Set 
aside ⅔ of the seeds. Add the molasses and sumac to the remaining ⅓, then crush 
them with the back of a fork to release the pomegranate juice. Stir in your 
chosen booze.

2 Line a small baking dish with half the sponge fingers, drizzle over half the 
liquid and allow it to soak in.

3 Meanwhile, mix the mascarpone, creme fraiche, sugar and rosewater until 
smooth. Spread half of this mix over the sponge fingers and top with half the 
reserved pomegranate seeds and half the raspberries, pressing them into the 
mascarpone mix as you go.

4 Lay the remaining sponge fingers over the fruit, pour over the remaining 
liquid and spread with the remaining mascarpone. Lightly whip the cream to soft 
peaks then dollop generously over the top of your tiramisu, dot over the 
remaining fruit and leave to chill until you are ready to serve.

Raspberry ripple baked yoghurt

Catherine Tennant’s mix is so delicious it almost didn’t make it into the 
oven. The raspberries are the perfect foil for the sweet, creamy, custard-like 
yoghurt mixture.

Makes 6
150g raspberries
1 tsp sugar
200g Greek yoghurt
200g condensed milk
200g double cream
1 vanilla pod, seeds scraped, or 1 tsp vanilla bean paste
Zest of ½ lemon
A pinch of salt

1 Set the oven to 140C/275F/gas mark 1. Pulse the raspberries with the sugar 
in a food processor until you get a rough puree. Set aside.

2 Combine the yoghurt, condensed milk, cream, vanilla seeds, lemon zest and a 
pinch of salt until smooth.

3 Put 6 ramekins (about 250ml each) in to a high-sided baking tray. Pour the 
yoghurt mixture evenly into the ramekins then ripple the raspberry puree 
through each. Pour boiling water into the baking tray so it comes up about ⅔ 
the height of the ramekin – be careful not to get water in your puds.

4 Bake for 35-40 minutes, or until just set with a slight wobble in the 
centre. Allow to cool then chill for at least two hours before serving.

Butternut squash, feta and raspberry salad

I am a huge fan of fruit in my savouries. I love pineapple on my pizza and 
mango in my curry and now – thanks toSuzanne Anderegg – I love raspberry in my 
salad. The sweet, juicy little berries work perfectly with the salty cheese and 
fresh minty dressing. No fancy ingredients but a very sophisticated looking and 
tasting salad.

Serves 4
1 butternut squash, halved and cut into wedges, seeds reserved
Extra virgin olive oil, for drizzling
Black pepper
3 tbsp pumpkin seeds 
100g baby broad beans
50g spinach or rocket leaves
200g mixed salad leaves
200g feta cheese, crumbled 
200g raspberries

For the dressing 
Zest and juice 2 lemons
4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
A handful of fresh mint leaves, shredded

1 Set the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Put the butternut squash on to a large 
baking sheet, drizzle with oil and season with black pepper. Bake for 30 
minutes. Remove from the oven, stir the squash and add the pumpkin seeds and 
the reserved squash seeds. Cook for a further 8-10 minutes, or until the squash 
is golden and tender and the seeds toasted. Remove from the oven.

2 Meanwhile, cook the broad beans in a pan of boiling salted water for 3 
minutes, drain and run under cold water to cool. Drain again, set aside.

3 To make the dressing whisk the lemon, oil and mint together until combined.

4 To assemble the salad, lay the spinach and mixed leaves on a serving plate, 
scatter the squash and seeds on top followed by the feta and raspberries. Pour 
over the dressing and gently toss to combine. Serve immediately.

Raspberry filo cigars

Crisp on the outside, gooey, sweet and sour on the inside, Rachel Kelly’s 
raspberry filo cigars taste rather fancy, but are actually pretty simple to 
rustle up. These would be great served with the baked raspberry ripple yoghurt 
pots.

Makes 12 
200g raspberries
150g feta, crumbled
60g dark chocolate, finely chopped 
1 tbsp caster sugar
Zest ½ orange
12 sheets filo pastry
100g butter, melted
Icing sugar, for dusting

1 Put the raspberries, feta, chocolate, sugar and orange zest into a bowl and 
mash lightly with a fork to combine. Set aside.

2 Cut the filo sheets in half lengthways, so you have sheets that measure 
roughly 12cm x 30cm. Cover with a clean, damp cloth.

3 Take one sheet of filo, brush with melted butter and lay another sheet 
directly on top. Put a heaped tablespoon of raspberry mixture along the short 
side of the filo, leaving a 1cm border. Roll away from you to enclose the 
filling, then fold the long edges in by 1cm. This will help keep the filling 
enclosed. Continue rolling away from yourself until you have a cigar shape. 
Brush with more butter and transfer to a well-greased baking tray. Carry on 
until you have used up all of the filling and pastry. Chill for 20 minutes. 
Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4.

4 Bake the raspberry cigars for 20-25 minutes, or until golden brown and 
crisp. Remove from the oven and allow to cool before dusting with icing sugar.

Related: Readers’ recipe swap: Caramelised | Dale Berning Sawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/31/caramelised-recipes-tarte-tatin-canapes-dulce-de-leche-recipe-swap>

Chock berry toastie

LeftoverLiz <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/leftoverliz> is a girl after 
my own heart: if you can make a sandwich out of anything then so much the 
better. And honestly, why have I never thought of this combination? Molten 
chocolate, hot raspberries and soft fruity bread with a crisp outside? This 
will work at any time of day or night.

Makes 1 
1 large fruit teacake, split in half 
50g raspberries 
1-2 tbsp chocolate spread
A knob of butter (if you don’t have a sandwich toaster or panini press)

1 Heat up your sandwich toaster or panini press, or put a nonstick frying pan 
over a medium heat.

2 Spread one half of the teacake with chocolate spread. Dot the other half 
with raspberries, gently squashing them into the bread. Sandwich the two halves 
together.

3 Put the toastie in the machine or panini press until crispy on the outside 
and molten on the inside. Alternatively, drop the butter into the pan. When it 
sizzles add the teacake, weigh it down with a saucer or the bottom of a clean 
pan, and cook for 1-2 minutes, or until golden and crisp. Flip over and cook 
for a further minute, or until the teacake is crisp and the inside is molten. 
Serve immediately with cream or ice-cream.

 * Rosie Reynolds is a food writer and food stylist. Her book, The Kitchen 
Shelf <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/401734/> 
(Phaidon) is out now;@rrfoodstyle  <https://www.instagram.com/rrfoodstyle> 