
In his essay Death to the Mass 
<https://medium.com/whither-news/death-to-the-mass-eb33c08dc3b6#.eycldk5s1> 
Jeff Jarvis develops an argument he has been making for years. Treating the 
public as “a mass” and giving them a “one-way, one-size-fits-all product” is no 
longer appropriate.

I’m totally with him on that. It is just one reason why newsprint national 
newspapers in Britain, the epitome of mass-marketing, are increasingly viewed 
as irrelevant by readers (and the people who want to reach them: advertisers).

Here’s Jarvis: “What has died is the mass-media business model — injuring, 
perhaps mortally, a host of institutions it symbiotically supported: 
publishing, broadcasting, mass marketing, mass production, political parties, 
possibly even our notion of a nation. We are coming at last to the end of the 
Gutenberg Age.”

By contrast, Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> 
connects people with people while Google gives people the option to go directly 
to what they want, and not what newspaper editors (aka information gatekeepers) 
tell them they should want.

Value, argues Jarvis, is far better than volume. And I nod again. He is on the 
money, is he not? I don’t need to repeat all of his core argument (go there if 
you wish 
<https://medium.com/whither-news/death-to-the-mass-eb33c08dc3b6#.g87p75xu7>) 
because it is good and I was on board long ago.

But where I depart from Jeff’s joyous acclamation of the brave new world of a 
post-mass disaggregated digital media is what it portends for our world.

He is convinced that quality journalism will prosper from “a relationship 
strategy” built around communities and shared interests. Allowing that to be 
the case, the key problem is still about revenue, about how we fund journalism 
when there is no mass paying for it.

Jeff asks that question of course. His answer is, to be frank, anything but 
convincing: “The industry is exploring various new revenue streams.” In other 
words, despite the exploration, nothing has yet worked.

This crucial question cannot be passed over. The funding of journalism, real 
journalism, the kind that costs money to produce - such as resource-heavy, 
lengthy, investigative journalism and the eye-witness, independent reporting 
from international conflict zones - is key to the future of democratic society.

Without money, whatever the strength of the argument in favour of a new form 
of journalistic distribution, whatever the good intentions of individual 
journalists, the act of journalism is imperilled.

There are plenty of pie-in-the-sky ideas about how we can re-attract 
advertisers, but none sounds remotely practical. We’re on a wing and a prayer 
here, Jeff. All your enthusiasm and optimism will not solve the problem.

Clearly, given that Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and 
Facebook are now the largest distributors of journalistic content, we 
journalists - providers of the raw material from which they benefit - need to 
reach an accommodation with them. They are our replacement newspapers, our 
hosts, our new media magnates.

We are in the content creation business. They are in the distribution 
business. They need our “product” and we need a portion of their profits to 
fund us.

Unlike our current “big media” publishers, they know more about their users 
than we ever did about our readers. That’s a great help to us. They also foster 
relationships, another help for us in reaching the right people with the right 
material.

Collaboration makes sense, but does anyone recognise the urgency of reaching 
an agreement?

I see journalists vanishing before my eyes. And I see journalism turning into 
“churnalism” on a daily basis. And that’s what frightens me most about the 
future: how will democracy be served if journalism means no more than the 
publishing of PR-packaged content “mediated” by people who never leave their 
computer screens?

Then there is the possibility that if journalism becomes something of a niche 
activity, how will we have a “national conversation” and, even more 
pertinently, if there is to be such a conversation, who will set its agenda?

I know the future is net-based. I knew it years ago when it was neither 
profitable nor popular to say so. I share much of Jeff Jarvis’s vision and his 
distaste for old-style, top-down, mass market journalism.

But how can we save public interest journalism, and the journalists who 
provide it, unless we find a business model to fund it?
