
It's Sunday evening and we are trying to get ready for the start of the school 
week. Traditionally a challenging time.

"Didn't 2010 whiz by," says Tilly. "Life is going so quickly. Do you feel as 
though your life has just whizzed by Mum?"

I pause because I do feel that but I don't want to alarm her. I remember when 
I was a child that an elderly relative told me she felt as young at 70 as she 
had done as a teenager. How terrible, I'd thought, because you look so very 
old. Now I feel pretty much the same. I avoid looking in the mirror because 
whoever I see in there is too old to be me. "It has gone quickly but I've been 
lucky – I've had a really rich life," I tell her, as though I'm composing my 
own obituary.

Much as I want Tilly to feel her childhood is a long, comforting cocoon, the 
maths is clear. In six years' time, no time at all, Tilly will be 18 and could 
leave home. She looks stricken at the thought. Since baby Flora has been born 
we play a lot of how old will she be when X or Y happens. When Tilly leaves 
home Flora will only be eight.

"You'll feel differently when you get to 18," I reassure her. I cried 
uncontrollably when I realised I was meant to leave home one day, but I try to 
sound cheery about it.

If Tilly is at the stage of realising that childhood and our home are 
temporary, Lydia is at the worse stage of realising that we all have to die. It 
may be a coincidence that school is starting the next day but I hear her 
sobbing after I've turned the bedroom light off.

"I don't want to die," she cries. Her face is wet and I hold her tightly. "And 
I'm upset because I don't want people around me to die," she gulps.

Part of me wonders if this is a ruse to avoid going to bed, but death is too 
big a deal to call her bluff on. Her distress certainly feels real. Two years 
ago, when she was seven, she used to joke about dying and ask who would look 
after her because being the youngest, (as she was then) her parents and older 
siblings were bound to die before her. "Who's going to die first," she'd ask 
cheerfully. "Nanny's old, she'll probably die in a couple of weeks." Well, 
she's not laughing now.

"What worries you most about dying?" I ask.

"I'll miss you when you die, Mummy," she says, in a way guaranteed to break my 
heart.

"Well that won't be for a long time yet," I say, swearing to myself I'll go 
to the gym and stop eating the fat off everyone else's meat. "And you shouldn't 
be afraid of dying because we all do it and there's no reason to think it's 
anything horrible."

This sounds shallow even to me.

"But what if it is dark, dark, dark for all eternity?" she asks.

"I thought you believed in God," I say, "So don't you believe in heaven?"

"But what if there isn't one?"

"Well let's hope there is," I say optimistically, remembering how I used to 
lie in bed terrified, overwhelmed at the thought of not existing any more. "It 
might be fine."

Realising your own mortality is a developmental stage, but I suspect that this 
conversation has been triggered by the box set ofMiss Marple 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miss_Marple> that she got for Christmas. Each 
episode has an average of three corpses.

"It's late and you've got school, and so let's talk about it properly 
tomorrow," I say, kissing her goodnight.

The next day Lydia has lost all interest in talking about death and it seems 
rude to insist. I do the maths and I've got eight more years to come up with 
some better lines before I have to go through it all again with Flora.
