
A pair of newlyweds have sparked outrage after a wedding guest revealed they 
had contacted her to say her gift was not generous enough.

The anonymous guest, an ex-colleague of the bride, asked for advice on a 
Mumsnet forum 
<http://www.mumsnet.com/Talk/mumsnet_classics/2630932-Post-wedding-message-please-help-me-what-the-hell-do-I-say?pg=10>
 after being told the £100 cheque she gave the couple was not sufficient.

Within three days she was inundated with more than a thousand responses, with 
many urging her to cancel the cheque altogether.

According to the poster, known as Puzzledandpissedoff, the email from the 
newlyweds read: “We were surprised that your contribution didn’t seem to match 
the warmth of your good wishes on our big day. In view of your own position, if 
you wanted to send any adjustment it would be thankfully received.”

The guest said she was “gobsmacked” and explained that her “own position” 
probably referred to a recent inheritance she had received.

“Please anyone, what do I do now? I’ve never come across anything like this 
before and still can’t quite believe they’ve done it – but since they have, 
should I reply, ring them, ignore it or what??” she asked.


While many users suggested cancelling the cheque, others advised informing 
mutual friends about what had happened.

Related: How much should you spend on a wedding gift? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/11/how-much-should-you-spend-on-a-wedding-gift>

One user wrote: “I would email back but BCC any mutual friends in so they are 
able to see the email for themselves. That is entitled and grabby. It’s a gift 
not an obligation and many people wouldn’t have given so much to an 
ex-colleague.”

Another said: “Cancel the cheque, then post their email on Facebook.”

Another commented: “Whatever the circumstance that is very rude. As to whether 
or not the gift was appropriate: did you bowl up with a partner and six 
children and proceed to demolish the buffet and free bar? No? Then £100 is a 
generous gift to an ex-colleague.”

The poster returned to the thread to express her surprise at the huge response 
she had received and added that, in the end, she chose to reply with one 
sentence: “I assume this was some sort of mistake?” Some days later she said 
the bride had still not responded.
