
'Do I still have a daddy?" asks Tilly as we travel to my mum's house for the 
weekend. She's not being serious but it's a fair question. J has been revising 
most weekends and after work for his end-of-year exams. He's doing a part-time 
degree course and for the past couple of months he has had to study more and 
father slightly less.

So I have cast myself in the role of supportive but slightly put-upon partner. 
As time has gone on the balance has shifted more to the latter.

Firmly in character, I put the children in the car and take them off for a 
weekend by the seaside – to make sure he's not distracted. Strictly speaking, 
it's more mud than seaside, but we're going to where I was brought up so I have 
nostalgic memories of digging in sand and paddling in tepid sea. J has a 
different view. "You were brought up in the armpit of Hampshire," he says.

But if it is an armpit, why are so many other people heading for it this 
morning? I had tried to get us to leave early but so, it seems, has everyone 
else. The girls had packed the night before – Lydia who's eight, filling two 
suitcases for the weekend – but I had forgotten that taking a baby anywhere 
requires a removal van. By the time we squash into the car – two girls, baby, 
Sam, my 21-year-old and my mother, who has been staying – there isn't much room 
to stretch out. As we will learn later, stuffing an uncomplaining 85-year-old 
into the car, hemmed in by large bags and a couple of violins (I'm a stickler 
for practice), is not such a good idea.

Meanwhile, Lydia, who has thrown up on a number of car journeys quite 
spectacularly, holds us to ransom. "I can't sit in the back, I'll be sick. And 
I need to borrow Tilly's iPod to distract me. Can you get me some soft mints 
from the garage? They really help me."

The journey should take just over two hours. But a combination of torrential 
rain and roadworks means it takes nearly twice that. Within half an hour of our 
arriving at Mum's house, Lydia and Tilly start low-level squabbling and I start 
shouting.

"I don't know why you two argue. It's so ugly," I say. "You should get on 
together."

I chance upon an old family photo album and hold up picture after picture of 
Sam and their older sister Maddy, arms wrapped around each other. Dressing up 
must have been big in those days because in one Sam is a Power Ranger and Maddy 
a ballerina; in another he is Robin and she is Batman. Maybe I was a better mum 
then. "Look, Sam and Maddy didn't fight."

I can see Sam toying with the idea of exploding this myth, but instead he 
smirks – just to tease me. "Of course they're not fighting in front of the 
camera," says Lydia, scornfully. "It's normal to fight with your sibling. You 
said you wished your brother was dead when you were little because you argued 
so much. And you argue anyway, with me, Tilly, Sam and your mum. You argue with 
everyone."

"Yes," says Tilly, "and I don't know why you're randomly shouting at me when 
it's Lydia's fault." I feel crushed. But then I reconsider: "I have to look 
after all of you, and sometimes I have to get you to do things you don't want 
to do. So then there are arguments."

At this point my mum hobbles into the room. Her right leg is swollen – a fact 
not unrelated to the four-hour car journey. Even I, who usually go for the 
"there's nothing wrong with you" school of medicine, realise that she needs to 
see a doctor. I decide to abandon the role of martyr and reach for the phone. 
"J," I say, "if you get through lots of work today, do you fancy coming here a 
bit later?"
