
The concluding sentences of your editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/the-guardian-view-on-the-eu-referendum-keep-connected-and-inclusive-not-angry-and-isolated>
 (21 June) are bizarre. “Vote for a unified country ... vote against a divided 
nation”. Supposing remain wins – are Brexit supporters to be liquidated? 
Whichever way it goes, it is likely that nearly half the voters will have voted 
for the rejected option. The nation is already divided, and the “losers” will 
hardly relinquish their beliefs on the spot. If the vote is very close, the 
fight will continue.
Josh Schwieso
Spaxton, Somerset 

• I brokered an agreement with my mother– in her 90s and unlikely to have many 
years to live with the result of Thursday’s vote – to use her vote to reflect 
the view of my daughter, aged 16 and therefore with no vote but a reasonable 
expectation of many years living with the result.
Maurice Herson
Oxford

• Labour leave supporters are no doubt as sincerely committed to social 
justice and democracy as those in the remain camp. But whatever the formal 
purpose of the referendum or the words on the ballot paper, isn’t Baroness 
Warsi right that the vote is now about our basic values? And if so, shouldn’t 
Labour parliamentarians still in the leave camp follow her wise example?
Brendan Martin
London

• While it is encouraging to see prominent economists supporting remain (We 
Nobel prize-winning economists believe the UK is better off in the EU 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/we-nobel-prize-winning-economists-believe-the-uk-is-better-off-in-the-eu>
, 20 June), they are preaching to the converted. Are such letters ever 
submitted to papers supporting leave, and do they ever appear? There they might 
change some minds.
Martin Wright
Sale, Greater Manchester

• I note that in the Sport section (21 June) you give the location of Euro 
2016’s match seven in the round of 16 as the Stade de Lyon on Monday 27 June. 
It is in fact to be held at the Stade de France. Surely we have had enough 
misinformation about Europe.
Des Waters
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
