
Conservative ministers are planning to repeal an array of official guidance on 
animal welfare standards, starting with a move to put the code on 
chicken-farming into the hands of the poultry industry.

Liz Truss, the environment secretary, is overseeing moves to scrap the 
statutory codes on farm animal welfare and move to an “industry-led” guidance 
as part of her department’s deregulatory agenda.

In a change that has caused concern with the RSPCA, Compassion in World Farming
 <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/farming>, and opposition parties, the 
government has already quietly tabled a draft order to scrap the official code 
on farming chickens for meat and breeding.

It is planning to revoke the code on 27 April – the day that new guidelines 
will be made public by the British Poultry Council, which will in future be in 
charge of writing and keeping the new regulatory code.

The industry body counts chicken hatchers and breeders as well as 
meat-processing giants such as Faccenda and 2Sisters among its member companies.

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs confirmed it will now 
begin working with other livestock sectors in a staged timetable of reform. 
Other sectors that could get control of their own guidance include the cattle, 
sheep and pig farming industries.

A Defra spokeswoman said that overarching animal welfare legislation that sets 
out criminal offences will remain in place alongside the new industry code. “No 
changes are being made to farm animal welfare legislation or the strict 
enforcement and penalties that apply,” she said.

“Instead, the British Poultry Council has produced new non-statutory guidance 
on how to comply with the legislation. The industry-led guidance can also be 
used as evidence in court to prove criminal liability and will ensure farmers 
have the most up-to-date and practical information.”

However, charities are worried that the move regarding poultry could weaken 
animal welfare standards in farms and lead to fewer prosecutions for animal 
cruelty.

Legislation that makes it a criminal offence to mistreat animals is not being 
changed but the statutory codes have until now been used to give magistrates 
guidance on where those being prosecuted have fallen short compared with good 
practice.

Peter Stevenson, chief policy adviser at Compassion in World Farming, said the 
charity was deeply concerned about the scope for animal welfare standards to be 
weakened.

“I find it very hard to believe when one goes from a government code to an 
industry code it is going to be as tough. For example, the government code on 
pigs is quite tough. It says tail docking should only be used as a last resort. 
Would the pig industry would keep such tough wording? I think inevitably one 
will see a dilution of the codes.

“I don’t think this is isolated but part and parcel of a wider approach. The 
job of a government department is to hold the balance between competing 
interests. It is not to come down on one side and say animal welfare, dietary 
health and the environment have to be subservient to the needs of industry. It 
is both damaging in itself, and illustrative and symptomatic of this wider 
problem that we are getting.”

In responses to the government’s consultation, released under Freedom of 
Information laws, concerns were also raised that in the future the code on 
chickens could move to recommend the common industry practice of catching birds 
with just one leg, rather than the government code’s current advice on catching 
with two legs.

The RSPCA said it has been voicing concerns for the past three years about the 
“downgrading” of the guidelines from statutory codes to industry-led guidance 
and criticised the lack of transparency around the process.

“We are concerned that this change to guidance could impact on the legal 
weighting these documents have in providing magistrates with legal guidance 
when considering negligence during animal welfare prosecutions,” a spokeswoman 
said.

“We also have concerns that the new guidance documents may not contain the 
same level of welfare information as the existing codes and may only serve to 
help ensure animal keepers are compliant with minimum legal requirements.”

The British Poultry Council said that the body had worked very closely with 
the government to ensure there was no weakening of standards. It said many of 
the codes are outdated and Defra did not have the resources to view all of 
them, but the new chicken guidance has been reviewed “using a significant 
amount of resource from the industry” and based on scientific evidence.

John Reed, chairman of the British Poultry Council, said: “We were determined 
to ensure that we protected the integrity of the code. It was critical for the 
BPC to achieve the endorsement from Defra to ensure its credibility and 
acceptance by charities, retailers and the industry itself. A robust review 
procedure will be put in place to ensure that the requirements in the code are 
kept up to date with any new legislation and research.”

Labour said the plans were “endangering Britain’s proud tradition as a country 
that stands up for animal welfare”.

Kerry McCarthy, the shadow environment secretary, said: “Abandoning codes of 
practice for farm animal welfare is not in the best interests of the animals 
and will not produce higher quality food.”

The move to deregulate animal welfare comes after the Guardian exposed poor 
hygiene standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/23/-sp-revealed-dirty-secret-uk-poultry-industry-chicken-campylobacter>
 in some of the poultry industry last year.

McCarthy added: “In the wake of food scandals from horsemeat to campylobacter, 
scrapping government standards risks undermining public confidence in the food 
we buy.”

Kate Parminter, a Lib Dem peer, will now table a regret motion in the House of 
Lords next month, saying she was “very, very concerned” that the process for 
scrapping the animal welfare codes was “not clear, not transparent and not all 
parties have been included”.

Government sources said that the UK has some of the highest animal welfare 
standards in the world and in Europe has pushed for higher standards, including 
ban on sow stalls, battery cages for laying hens and veal crates.




