
Melton Mowbray, town of Graham Chapman, Sir Malcolm Sargent and Janxter the 
Dog, is self-proclaimed Rural Capital of Food. That's a big claim, you may 
think, a bit over the top, maybe. And yet how many towns of comparable size 
have six butchers, five bakers, four micro-breweries, a shop dedicated to 
sausages, a fish shop, a cheese shop, two pie shops, two food markets (and I 
don't mean supermarkets), a food museum and a cattle market? Melton Mowbray is 
famous for Stilton, which is made in the surrounding countryside, and for its 
exceedingly good pies. Stilton has PGI (protected geographical status), awarded 
by those fine fellows in Brussels, and the Melton Mowbray Pork Pie Association, 
of which there are eight members, has applied for the same recognition for its 
beloved product. God and Brussels willing, they will receive it this month.

But none of this excited me nearly as much as the discovery of Melton's cattle 
(and sheep, chickens, rabbits, ferrets - "If it moves, they'll sell it," 
councillor Matthew O'Callaghan says) market. How many towns can boast one of 
those? And in the heart of the town, too? A few years back, there were moves to 
ease it out of town, as has happened with livestock markets elsewhere, as if 
they were unseemly. Thankfully they failed: in Melton, they decided the market 
should stay put, making a statement about the importance of farming to the 
community.

I can't possibly pretend that the cattle market is picturesque in the 
conventional sense. It comprises an agglomeration of utilitarian barns with 
concrete floors, no walls and corrugated iron roofs. Each Tuesday, however, its 
holding pens flood with cattle, sheep, chickens and rabbits. Men with ruddy 
faces, well-worn working clothes and the odd flat cap watch the cattle as they 
come one by one into the small, round auction pits. There they pirouette in a 
meaty ballet at the touch of a stick wielded by an old man in a green coat and 
sunglasses, while the auctioneer chants, "It's a steer. It's a steer. Starting 
at one thirty, one thirty-one, one thirty-two, one thirty-three..." in a flat 
monotone, registering almost imperceptible nods from competing buyers until the 
nodding stops and the sale is signified by a quick rap on the auctioneer's 
table.

There is a sea of sheep - all 6,000 of them - their mop-head coats streaked 
with a different colour to show the farm of origin. They seem docile as they 
are sold off, either as "cold" ewes past their breeding cycle, which are sought 
after by the Midlands' Asian communities; or as fat lambs for slaughter; or as 
forward lambs for fattening up; or as "glimmers", whatever they are; or, 
indeed, as any one of a dozen classes described in terms as arcane as those 
used in particle physics.

Over in the fur and feather section, punters move up and down the cages of 
chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pea fowl, guinea fowl and pigeons. The burble 
of human voices is cut by the clamour of a cock crowing. You can also bid for 
rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chinchillas, gerbils, rats and mice (but not 
dogs or cats).

Wander about the full area of this market, though, and you soon realise that 
it's more than just a livestock market. It's a market theme park, a complex 
where you can buy just about anything - timber, plants and produce, game and 
eggs, bits and bobs and bobs and bits. There's a farmers' market, an antiques 
fair, car-boot sales and a banqueting suite, drawing in customers and gawkers 
from all over the region. It's a commercial dynamo for the wider town. And vice 
versa. It was these what you might call ancillary activities that kept the 
cattle market afloat in the dark days of foot-and-mouth, when, for once, the 
relationship between town and country was mutually supportive, rather than 
mutually uncomprehending.
