
You just about have your life under control and wham – there's a school 
project or production (including assemblies). Or there's jeans for jars day 
(bring in a jar loaded with sweets and your child doesn't have to wear a 
uniform) or a cake sale (in which you make cakes and then buy them back), or 
national book day, or walk to school week. It's these little things that can 
tip you over the edge.

However, Lydia, who is eight, has started a great project. It's about spying. 
So on Monday morning she announces that she needs a spying outfit. None of us 
are sure what a spying outfit is, but we scour the house and find a beret, some 
genius glasses from a Christmas stocking that have side mirrors so you can see 
what is going on behind you (your teacher will be wanting them, I warn Lydia), 
and a large grey raincoat.

As I drop her off at school, she is quite excited. "Miss Y wants anyone who 
knows anything about spying to come in and talk to the class. Do you know 
anything about spying or codes or anything?"

Regretfully, no. I've only ever watched some James Bond films. In four years I 
have never known enough to talk to her class about anything.

The next day, after school, she is uncharacteristically quiet. She sits at the 
kitchen table and occasionally looks up and then writes something on a piece of 
paper. "What are you doing, darling?" I ask.

She pauses but can't resist telling me. "I'm spying on you," she says. "We 
have to spy on a member of our family and write a report for homework."

Now, I can hardly protest about intrusions into our family's privacy, but the 
idea of unfiltered tales reaching the school staff room fills me with horror. I 
suspect that you could catch anyone doing something unsavoury if you watched 
them for long enough. "How long are you meant to do it for?"

"Twenty minutes."

That's not likely to yield much. In my case, a bit of breastfeeding, yelling 
at the children to come off the computer and eating half a chocolate biscuit, 
and putting the rest in the bin. "I don't want to be spied on," I say. "Why 
don't you spy on the baby?"

"That will be boring. All she does is eat, sleep and poo."

For Tilly, in year six, it is sex education time. Having had five children and 
worked for six months as a doctor in gynaecology, I feel that sex education, 
unlike all other school topics, is well within my comfort zone. This is 
something I could talk about. However, none of my children have ever wanted me 
to.

"They showed us a cartoon of people having sex and a clip of a woman having a 
baby," Tilly tells me as I meet her from school. "The clip was only five 
minutes. They used to show a film from the 1970s, which went on for 20 minutes 
with lots of blood and you know they didn't have anaesthetic then and you could 
hear the woman screaming."

I'm not sure which depiction of childbirth is less helpful – the 
out-in-five-minutes version or the horror movie. "Is there anything you want to 
know about sex or puberty?" I ask.

Tilly looks mortified. After all, we are on a street and someone with 
superhuman hearing might have heard.

"Shhh, Mum, please, no, no."

And rather than being able to share my extensive knowledge, I am relegated 
that evening to trying to find a Victorian nightie on the internet for the 
end-of-term school show.
