
Jo was one of the most kind, caring, and committed people I have had the 
privilege to know. She could also make herself a right royal pain in the 
backside if she profoundly disagreed with you; a lesson many political leaders 
learned too late, and to their cost.

I first met Jo when she was fresh out of university, when she worked for 
Glenys Kinnock MEP (at the time, known colloquially as the MEP for South Wales 
and Soweto because of her domestic and international work). Jo would engage me 
in conversation as I waited for Glenys – often about the appalling nature of my 
clashing ties, but more often about issues such as the current detention 
condition of Aung San Suu Kyi, or the changes happening so rapidly in South 
Africa.

Jo could chat to anyone, even me, because she loved people; she was cheeky, 
with a dry, sardonic humour, often aimed at herself. Jo could equally happily 
spend hours playing with refugee children in a camp, or engaging rather 
la-di-da intelligentsia in an international thinktank. It’s also why Jo, with 
her husband Brendan, spent their summer holidays working with war orphans in 
Sarajevo.

But wherever Jo was, she was always herself. Authentic. I never saw her put on 
airs and graces, nor speak down to anyone. 

Jo was fearless. Or at least could make herself appear to be when it mattered. 
In the early 2000s, Jo was in her late 20s, and looked about 17. She had a very 
broad Yorkshire accent (much broader than mine, mind), yet was unanimously 
appointed to the head of Oxfam’s Brussels office, due to the power of her 
intellect, persuasion, and passion.

This meant regular meetings with the EU trade commissioner, Peter Mandelson, 
and his coterie of powerful advisers. Mandelson, a man of sophisticated and 
urbane manner, quickly had to adjust his perception and approach to the meeting 
when feisty Jo, brimming with expert trade facts, gave him a masterclass in 
European trade policy, and how it must change to benefit the poor of the world.

We laughed together for hours afterwards, as we recollected the change in 
their expressions through the meeting, from warm but patronising condescension, 
to terror.

Jo could do this because she loved justice. She felt it in her guts. Jo was 
moved almost too much by the suffering she worked alongside in Darfur, Sudan. 
She devoted years of her life to the plight of refugees.

But she also knew how to pressure repressive governments that forced people to 
flee their homes. She put together a visit of eight global women leaders to 
Darfur, led by Mary Robinson with African economists and parliamentarians, and 
then organised their tour of the world’s capitals to put maximum international 
pressure on the regime in Khartoum from Washington DC, London, Paris, Brussels, 
and Berlin.


Power with love


And finally, Jo loved love. She knew in her bones its transformational power. 
Perhaps because she came from a loving family, and a close working class 
community in Leeds. She loved her kids with the same furious passion – dashing 
home from parliament to tuck them into bed at night, before dashing back for 
another late night vote.

And Jo’s politics were inspired by love. When she said in her maiden speech 
that “while we celebrate our diversity, we are far more united, and have far 
more in common with each other than things that divide us” she spoke of that 
love.

Jo’s politics embodied the great words of Martin Luther King: “Power without 
love is reckless and abusive, and love without power is sentimental and 
anaemic. Power at its best is love implementing the demands of justice, and 
justice at its best is power correcting everything that stands against love.” 
That was how Jo conducted herself as a leader at Oxfam, and as an MP in our 
democracy.

In this dark hour we live through, Mary Robinson wrote to us from Ireland 
saying: “A light can shine through when it has the integrity of everything Jo 
lived for.”

Let’s all make sure that happens. 


Today would have been Jo Cox’s 42nd birthday. Celebratory events are being 
held around the world with the hashtag #MoreinCommon, taken from her maiden 
speech in parliament. 

Phil Bloomer was Jo Cox’s boss at Oxfam. He is currently executive director at 
theBusiness and Human Rights Centre <https://business-humanrights.org/>. This 
piece is extracted from a speech about Jo, given to a gathering of Oxfam 
workers, and republished on the Oxfam blogFrom poverty to power 
<http://oxfamblogs.org/fp2p/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 
