
It’s the end of the salt season. Did you even know there is one? I’m wearing 
borrowed gum boots and standing on Pink lake in the Wimmera in western 
Victoria, which is an expanse of water about four times the size of the MCG. 
The chilly wind is blustering through any warm clothing we’ve been warned to 
wear and the sunshine is glaringly brilliant and harsh.

The name of the lake is self-explanatory – it is a delightful candy-hued, 
pretty shade of pink and while I’d like to think I’m walking on water I am, in 
fact, walking on salt.

The Seymour family, Jane and Neil and their son Richard, who run Mt Zero Olives
 <http://www.mountzeroolives.com> in the Grampians, started harvesting salt 
from the lake in 2009.


“We were looking at ways of diversifying our products,” says Richard, which 
include olives, olive oils, lentils and chickpeas. “And we all knew about the 
lake.”


Seymour says that for many years the locals have been taking the odd bucket of 
salt from the lake for cooking at home but it hadn’t been harvested 
commercially since the 1970s.

In the mid-2000s, Jane Seymour decided to research the possibility of hand 
harvesting the salt.

The lake is Crown Land which meant for the next four years permission was 
sought from the various state and federal government departments that manage 
it. Jane started with the Barengi Gadjin Land Council, the traditional owners 
of the land, hoping they could approach the government together.

After four years of discussions, by 2009 Mt Zero and the Barengi Gadjin Land 
Council were ready for their first harvest. All the harvesting is done by hand 
and members of the local Indigenous community are employed to help with it 
every year, through March or April, before the lake fills with the winter rains.

Despite the vastness of the lake, the group target an area the size “of about 
two tennis courts and we move to different parts of the lake each year”, says 
Jane Seymour.


A wide-mouthed shovel is used to scrape back the top layer of the salt to 
remove any impurities and this reveals the beautiful pink chunks of salt 
underneath. The harvesters take up to 1.5cm (about half-an-inch says Seymour) 
from the top of the lake in the designated area. The salt is then put into 
500kg plastic bins and taken to Melbourne where it is finished off – dried, 
sifted, milled and packaged – in the company’s warehouse in West Footscray.

From the harvest – a wet weight of 30 tonnes is taken to the city – the 
Seymour’s yield about 24 tonnes of salt which they package and sell to bakers 
for their breads, to butchers for their sausages and to restaurants, cafes and 
specialty food shops for consumers.

They flavour the salt with various ingredients too including local sea kelp, 
chilli salt and a new salt mixed with roasted kalamata olives, from the 
Seymour’s olive grove, naturally. Of course, you can buy it without any extra 
flavour – just as is.

Pink Lake salt has a great depth of flavour, it’s more subtle than highly 
processed salt and isn’t nearly as harsh and intense as some salts can be. 
Perfect as a finishing salt, while cooking, adding to dressings or on the 
table, it is regional, local and even seasonal … seems there is a season for 
everything.
