
Kids snowboard coaching camp, Morzine, France


In response to the fact snowboarder parents often want snowboarder (not 
skier!) kids, Rude Chalets andMint Snowboarding 
<http://www.mintsnowboarding.com/> have launched Snowboard Coaching Weeks for 
four to eight-year-olds. The first of their kind in Europe, with access to 
specialised Burton "Learn to Ride" snowboard equipment, the lessons will aim to 
teach children the basics while having as much fun as possible. At the end of 
the week they'll get a mini-video edit of their riding highlights, which is 
included in the price as are lessons, use of Burton boards, accommodation, 
transfers and half board.
• 0870 068 7030, rudechalets.com <http://www.rudechalets.com/>, £799 for 
children, £569 for accompanying adults. March 30-April 6 and April 6-13

Digital piste games or star in a film Les Gets, France


Use your smart phone to solve a number of on-piste riddles and tasks dotted 
around the ski area as Les Gets becomes one of the first resorts to embrace 
digital snow gaming. Also on the slopes in the American-Indian fun village at 
Grand Cry, kids can play in the teepees, attend war-paint workshops and star in 
their own film doing a snow dance or improvised song, which they can, of 
course, share on social media should they wish.
• no phone number, en.lesgets.com <http://en.lesgets.com/snow-ski/prices.html>
. A Les Gets six-day lift pass costs £144 for an adult and £109 for a child; 
families of four get a 10% discount and under fives ski free

Free lessons for under 17s Arosa, Switzerland

 Photograph: PR 
Even if the lessons weren't free, Arosa would be a great place to learn as 
it's sunny, with heaps of cruisey blue runs and a solid snow record, plus its 
location at the end of the wooded Schanfigg Valley keeps it sheltered from the 
wind. But to lure visitors, the resort is offering free group ski or snowboard 
lessons all winter with theSSSA <http://sssa.ch/en> (Swiss Ski and Snowboard 
School Arosa) to those born in and after 1996, who stay in participating hotels 
for a minimum of two nights.
• +41 81 378 7020, arosa.ch 
<http://www.arosa.ch/sites/accommodation/arosa_invites_to_ski.html>. 
Seven-night stays from £895 for family of four

Free childcare while you spa Meribel, France

Taking the little angels to the mountains may be a lot of things (memorable, 
hilarious, rewarding) but there's no point pretending it's relaxing. But it 
could be for an hour at least while you have a treatment at the Olympic Sports 
Complex Spa in Meribel thanks to Garde'n Spa, where free childcare is provided 
at the Piou Piou Nursery between 5.30-8pm. Duo couple massages are also 
available. Or, if you have pre-teens in your group, nine to 12-year-olds can 
have massages on Wednesdays between 2-5pm, with older children offered a 
"Special Teenage Facial". These treatments aren't free or, some might say, 
quite as necessary.
• +33 479 00 4230, meribel.net 
<http://french-alps.meribel.net/ski-france-2011.html> 

Santa-free Christmas trips for cynical teens, Finnish Lapland 

 Northern Lights Finland Photograph: Andy Pietrasik/aurorahunters.com 
If your kids are at an age where Santa brings jeers not cheers but you still 
want winter wonderland vibes this Christmas, Activities Abroad is running 
Family Northern Lights trips to Menesjärvi in Finnish Lapland. Evenings are 
geared around aurora hunting by snowshoe and snowmobile, while daytime pursuits 
include cross-country skiing, sledging, a husky safari and learning wilderness 
skills such as winter fishing, animal tracking, reindeer lassoing and the retro 
art of map reading. The hotel is run by the Lappalainen family, whose Sami 
roots have been in the area for centuries and guests are encouraged to learn 
basic Sami words and engage in the local traditions and culture.
• 01670 789 991, activitiesabroad.com 
<http://www.activitiesabroad.com/holidays/335/family-northern-lights>. For 23 
December departures: adults £1,695, children 12 to 15 £1,495 and children eight 
to 11 £1,345 including flights, transfers, meals, activities, guides and 
cold-weather clothing

New forest ski trails for kids Crested Butte, USA

Crested Butte, in the heart of Colorado's Rocky Mountains, has carved out 
three new narrow and winding kids trails in the Painter Boy area to create a 
magical forest-like experience for young skiers. There is also a ski-through 
bear cave, US Forest Service lodge, Elk Avenue facade (the resort's main 
street), and a gold-mining building for interactive play and learning with a 
nod to the town's mining heritage. Advanced adults and older children will 
enjoy some of the best extreme terrain in North America.
• American Ski Classics (020-8607 9988, americanskiclassics.com 
<http://www.americanskiclassics.com/>)has seven-night trips from £1,071pp 
including flights, transfers, accommodation, lift passes and ski hire

Freeride courses for eight to 18-year-olds La Clusaz, France


La Clusaz, a 50-minute drive from Geneva, is hosting the final of the Junior 
FWT Freeride World Tour <http://www.freerideworldtour.com/juniors.html> for the 
first time in March and, to coincide with that, they're running new freeride 
courses for intermediate-level children aged eight and above with Evolution 2. 
There's also a new Nordic ski park and ice rink in the resort.
• Five days of three-hour off-piste lessons cost £175 or a private two-hour 
lesson is £80. Crystal Ski Holidays (0871 231 9501,crystalski.co.uk 
<http://www.crystalski.co.uk/>) has a week's stay at the La Residence 
Apartments in La Clusaz from £634pp (based on four sharing), including flights 
and a six-day lift pass

Cross-country ski school for kids Leutasch, Austria


The Leutasch valley, part of Olympiaregion Seefeld, is one big snowy 
playground and a great place for children to try cross-country skiing. The 
SkiSchule Leutasch offers a special course for six to 12-year-olds (younger 
children can have private lessons) in the newly landscaped children's park, 
with wave runs, bumps and trails to keep the lessons varied and interesting. 
Along with being great for children's fitness, it'll improve their all-round 
skiing.
• A three-day course costs £71 per child. Lessons for children aged four to 
six with a private instructor from £33 per hour. Seven nights at Hotel 
Leuta-scherhof (+43 5214 6470,skischule-leutasch.at 
<http://www.skischule-leutasch.at/>) for a family of four, based on one under 
five and one five-12, costs £1,230 for a week, including ski hire

Nanny ski-school pick-ups St Anton, Austria


For guests with ski school-age children staying at the Hotel Montjola in St 
Anton, VIP SKI Chalets is launching the Montjola Kids service so parents can 
ski full days or enjoy the occasional bout of après ski. A nanny will collect 
children from ski school, either at 12pm for Bambinis or 3pm for Minis and Kids 
and provide childcare until 6.30pm (Mon-Fri, Sat 9.30am-5.30pm), including a 
supervised tea. The resort has a 4.3km natural toboggan run, an ice-skating 
rink, bowling ally, climbing wall, children's pool at the sports centre and 
kids can travel half price if they stay in family rooms.
• 0844 557 3119, vip-chalets.com 
<http://www.vip-chalets.com/chalets/hotel-montjola>. The Montjola Kids service 
costs £175 per child pw (introductory price). Hotel rates start at £899pp, 
based on two sharing with discounts of £75 per child or £125 per infant (under 
two). There are also early booking discounts of £100 for selected weeks until 
the end of October

Free lift passes Panorama, British Columbia, Canada 


Often overlooked in favour of western Canada's big-hitting neighbours, Banff 
and Lake Louise, Panorama is a great family resort, due to its convenient 
village and child-friendly activities – which include crafts, cooking and movie 
nights with the Wee Rascals and, for older children, karaoke, trivia and teen 
club nights. On the mountain there are good beginner and intermediate pistes, a 
terrain park and some awesome bowls and double-black diamond tree runs for 
those who are up to it. Night skiing is also available.
• Ski Independence (0131 243 8097, ski-i.com <http://www.ski-i.com/>) is 
offering seven nights accommodation (for a family of four sharing a condo), 
plus flights and transfers for £899pp, if you book before 15 November

Sam Haddad is the editor of Cooler <http://cooler.mpora.com>
