
1 What is the most common pub name in the UK?

The Red Lion, The Crown, The Royal Oak, The White Hart

2 Who had an unlikely pop hit with Two Pints of Lager and a Packet of Crisps 
Please, and inspired the title of a TV sitcom?

Tenpole Tudor, Underworld, Sham 69, Splodgenessabounds

3 Where can you buy a pint of Newton and Ridley beer?

The Rovers Return, The Woolpack, The Queen Vic, The Bull

4 The Slaughtered Lamb pub features in which comedy horror film?

Shaun of the Dead, An American Werewolf in London, Hot Fuzz, Lesbian Vampire 
Killers

5 According to the book of Guinness World Records, what is the UK’s longest 
pub name?

The Old Thirteenth Cheshire Astley Volunteer Rifleman Corps Inn, The 
Sutton-Under-Whitestone-cliff Fisherman’s Halt, The Bishop Langley of Durham’s 
Galilee Chapel Public House and Hostlers, The 
Llanfairpwll-gwyngyllgogerychwyrndrobwllllantysiliogogogoch Arms

6 The Slim Dusty country music hit A Pub With No Beer was based on a wartime 
incident when American servicemen drank dry which public house?

The Old Irish pub in Boston, Massachusetts; The Salters Arms pub in Thetford, 
Norfolk; The Army and Navy pub in Tenby, South Wales; The Day Dawn hotel in 
Ingham, Queensland, Australia

7 Who said: “I have two ambitions in life: one is to drink every pub dry, the 
other is to sleep with every woman on earth”?

George Best, Dylan Thomas, Oliver Reed, Nick Frost

8 What is the pub called in the film Carry On at Your Convenience?

The Queen’s Legs, The King’s Armpit, The Cock and Bull, The Whippit Inn

9 What famously happened in a room above the Red Lion pub on Great Windmill 
Street, London?

The Who played their first ever gig, Karl Marx was asked to draft The 
Communist Manifesto, Bram Stoker wrote Dracula, The first performance of the 
play Look Back in Anger took place

10 What is unique about the Flying Horse pub in London?

It’s a women-only pub, It’s the highest pub in the UK, It doesn’t serve any 
beer, It’s the last remaining alehouse on Oxford Street
