
My husband of 14 years never gives me compliments. This isn’t new – he’s 
always been like this. Maybe a couple of times a year he’ll say, “You look 
nice” but that’s it. He never tells me that my hair smells great or my skin is 
soft, or he loves my legs in that skirt. It has a negative effect on our sex 
life since I don’t feel very desirable to him, so we only have sex every couple 
of months. 

About once a year it really gets me down and I weep a lot, and question 
whether I can spend the rest of my life with someone who, for the most part, 
feels like a roommate more than a lover. I only “recover” from these periods 
when the rest of life, like the children, takes over and I get distracted by 
other things.

I’ve explained all of this to my husband. He hates to see me upset, but seems 
incapable of doing anything about it. He says it’s too hard, he doesn’t know 
what to say or he doesn’t want to say the wrong thing. Sometimes, after I’ve 
threatened to leave him, he’ll make an effort for a couple of days, which shows 
that he can do it if he wants to – but then it’s back to where we started for 
another year. Frankly, this is almost worse, since I know he is capable of 
being thoughtful if he tries. Whenever he does say something positive to me, I 
always make sure I react appreciatively so he knows he’s getting it right. But 
he just gives up.

He’s also not affectionate nor does he do anything to make me feel special, 
such as buy me occasional presents or do little thoughtful things.

How can I help my husband to understand what a huge impact his lack of 
communication is having on our lives?

You say you’ve been married for 14 years and he’s always been like this, so I 
wondered what has prompted you to ask for help now? Somehow, I feel this may be 
significant.

I consulted counsellor Sharon Breen, (bacp.co.uk <http://www.bacp.co.uk/>) who 
also wondered what happened once a year to make you feel “really down” about it 
all? She thought that “this was obviously a mutually frustrating and lonely 
stand off”, and that you both seemed “stuck”.

She said: “The way you are dealing with the rejection, as you see it, is by 
withdrawing and threatening to leave. It’s not helpful, although it’s 
understandable.”

Breen explained that some people “don’t use language the way we’d like them 
to. There may be a basic misunderstanding, your husband may find this 
confusing. He will have a go at complimenting you, but it may not come 
naturally. Because you are feeling desperate/frustrated/rejected, I wonder if 
you are then dismissing his repair attempts.”

You say he is “capable of being thoughtful if he tries”, but I don’t think 
that’s what’s happening. I think he is able to follow instructions for a short 
amount of time, but it simply doesn’t come naturally to him. Anyway, the whole 
situation, when your relationship goes into “repair” mode, seems very false and 
scripted.

Not authentic at all – your husband saying things you have told him to say, 
you reacting appreciatively. I wonder where your idea of what relationships are 
meant to be like comes from? I don’t mean this unkindly – we’re all entitled to 
the relationships we want. But something must have attracted you to your 
husband. Has he changed? Have you? Did you hope you could change him?

A lot can depend on how love was shown to him – and you – growing up. Some 
people never say “I love you” but show it in many different ways; some say “I 
love you” all the time, but don’t mean it.

Does he really not do anything that’s loving? I don’t mean the presents you 
mention but those little loving acts couples can do for one another? Do you 
ever pay him compliments? I thought your letter was very one sided about the 
things he doesn’t do for you, no mention at all of what he does (really, 
nothing?) or the things you do for him (not important?).

Breen also wondered about “specific compliments” you wanted him to pay you, 
and she wondered “how you felt about yourself?” I thought this was an important 
point, maybe the key to your whole issue.

“The fact that he hates to see you upset is a good sign,” says Breen, “as is 
the way he tries very hard to do what you are asking of him when you threaten 
to leave.”

What to do? Well, there is couples counselling, of course – although it’s 
often very hard to get your partner to go (you can go alone). Breen suggested: 
“Be curious. If possible, make requests rather than demands. Explain your 
feelings to him [when calm, when you are getting on most] so he understands 
exactly how you feel. Use lots of ‘I’ statements rather than blaming, 
criticising or bottling it up. Ask him more about what it’s like for him to 
express his feelings and affection. Ask how you can help him with this.”

Breen also wondered if both, or one, of you was experiencing stress “outside 
the marriage, as the way we understand our partner’s behaviour is linked to the 
stress we are under. We are likely to be more charitable when stress is low.”

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
