
Sky will premiere a new film every day, including the latest Star Wars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/starwars> film this summer, as part of a 
rebrand of Sky Movies as Sky Cinema.

The move will see a 75% increase in the number of films debuting on Sky from 8 
July. The company signed a deal with Disney in 2013 to debut new releases in 
the Star Wars franchise and comic book blockbusters from Marvel, and also has a 
deal to premiere films from rival superhero publishing house DC.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii> will be available from 
August this year, with subsequent films in the series appearing each summer, 
starting with spin-off Rogue One in 2017. The company will also be resurrecting 
its standalone Star Wars channel, which showed previous films in the series 
when Force Awakens hit cinemas late last year.

Related: Sky News host: not my intention to offend over Orlando shootings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/13/almost-60-complaints-to-ofcom-over-sky-news-orlando-paper-review>

The pay-TV provider is also increasing the number of films available on demand 
by 20% to 1,200, and launching as dedicated world film slot on Wednesdays from 
10pm. Other films coming to Sky Cinema include Spectre, Mission Impossible: 
Rogue Nation, Steve Jobs, Bridge of Spies and The Danish Girl.

Its rebrand brings the branding for Sky’s movie channels in the UK and Ireland 
in line with its operations in Germany, Austria and Italy which were all merged 
into one pan-European network last year.

The pay-TV provider has ensured it has exclusive rights to a large swathe of 
blockbuster films eight months after cinema release and for more than a year 
before they appear on free broadcast channels or subscription services.

The emphasis on big releases is partly driven by growing competition from 
cheaper subscription services such as Netflix and Amazon Prime, which have 
larger on-demand libraries of films but fewer new releases.

It has been pushing its own on-demand online service Sky Go and has launched a 
Now TV box that allows customers to access Sky without a satellite dish.

Sky Cinema director Ian Lewis said: “With Sky Cinema we are giving customers 
an even closer to the cinema experience with enhanced picture and sound 
quality. However, we know the heart of the service is great movies.

“Customers want a breadth of the latest quality films to enjoy with the 
flexibility to watch whenever they want and on whatever device they choose. Sky 
Cinema builds on this commitment with even more premieres and instant access to 
an unrivalled library of the latest blockbusters and classic films.”

