
It's a cold, wet night in England, but this place looks pretty darn Texan. 
We're at my friend Tom's flat to play poker. The game is Texas hold'em, 
and everything's American: watery beer in the fridge, chicken wings in the oven 
and a huge bowl of jelly beans on the table. Tom's even dug up a dealer's visor.

Six of us are squished around the table – Tom, me, Laura, Jake (an old friend 
visiting from Shanghai), Lynn and my girlfriend, Georgie. We've agreed to a 
buy-in of £10, but only Georgie's come prepared. Jake and Lynn offer Chinese 
yuan, I scrape up £6.70 in change, Tom and Laura settle for IOUs. We're pros, 
obviously.

Tom knows the rules, so he gives us a brief tutorial (see panel beneath main 
story).

The dealer hands out two cards each. A starting bet of one chip (the small 
blind) is put down by the player to the dealer's left, then one double that 
(the big blind) by the next player along. Everyone else looks at their cards 
and matches the big blind if they want to play. The dealer then lays out three 
"community cards" (known as the flop), a fourth card (the turn) and a fifth 
(the river), with a round of betting in between each. During betting each of us 
can choose to raise the bet (meaning everyone else has to match it), check (a 
free pass with no extra chips laid down, requiring all players to show their 
cards) or fold (quit the round).

The idea is to play the best combination of the seven cards available to you 
(two of your own, five on the table) to win the combined bets (the pot). 
'Hands't range from a pair (two queens, say) to a full house (one pair plus 
three of a kind, eg two sevens and three queens) to the majestic royal flush 
(ten, jack, queen, king and ace, in the same suit) with various fiddly 
iterations in between. It sounds complicated on paper, but it's easy to pick 
up, especially if – like me – you're willing to turn an enjoyable game of skill 
and luck into a psychological mauling of people you hold dear.

Tom deals first and we're off: elbow-to-elbow around the pot. It would be 
difficult not to see Laura's cards, even if I wasn't trying to. "You can't see 
my hand, can you?", she asks. "No. Of course not". Laura has the two of 
diamonds and the King of spades. I haven't played much poker, but – seeing as I 
am lying and cheating before the first hand is done – I must be a natural.

Wikipedia says that success in the game relies on having a rich understanding 
of psychology and probability, but years of watching films have taught me that 
it's all about the tell. The tell is a behavioural tic that gives you an idea 
of whether your opponent is bluffing about what's in their hand. Derren Brown 
once taught a pensioner to beat a table of professional players by reading 
their tells. I decide to give it a go.

Jake and Lynn are easy to read. They've come all the way in from the suburbs 
for my poker night. Their tell is needing to catch the last train back.

Laura has a knack for reading the table and a gift for pushing others to bet 
more than they can afford. Her tell is that I can see her cards.

I know Georgie hates inefficiency. So I think she'd bet only when she has 
something impressive in her hand. Speaking to her afterwards it turns out that 
this is nonsense. "I'm a piss-taking bluffer," she says, a bit annoyed that 
I've misread her so badly. To be fair, we've only been in a relationship for 
five years.

Tom – one of my best friends since I was 15 – should be an easy mark in 
comparison. Instead he's my nemesis – harder to read than Pynchon. He's 
practical and logical. He keeps track of the bets, and sets an alarm to remind 
us when to raise the blind. But then there's his inconsistency. For every 
handful of chips that he stacks (a sign of a conservative player, according to 
poker gurus), there's another sprawling across the table. He could be an expert 
player, but maybe this is just Tom – the sweet-natured, fun-loving guy who once 
got so angry he threw a sofa at me. He's been like a brother for nearly two 
decades. At the table, I don't know him at all.

We go back and forth between hands, with the chips sliding between us until I 
luck out on a pair of aces ("statistically the best starting hand" – Wikipedia, 
again) and go all in, because that's what they do in films. I win. A huge pot 
is mine.

From there it's a matter of forcing people into submission by betting higher 
than they can hope to match. "This isn't fun anymore," says Georgie. I feel 
sympathy, which somehow morphs into a greedy sneer on the way to my face.

The game ends. The tenner, the 200 yuan and the IOUs are mine. I'm over the 
moon. Everyone else seems a bit glum. But that's poker. A game where there can 
be only one winner and that winner is a liar, a bully and – in this case – a 
cheat.
 WC Fields makes a poker face. Photograph: Bettmann/Corbis 
The rules

Handouts 
The dealer hands out two cards each. A starting bet of one chip (the small 
blind) is put down by the player to the dealer's left, then one double that 
(the big blind) by the next player along.
In or out
Everyone else looks at their cards and matches the big blind if they want to 
play. The dealer then lays out three "community cards" (the flop), a fourth 
card (the turn) and a fifth (the river), with a round of betting in between 
each.
Raise the game
During betting each player can raise the bet (everyone else has to match it), 
check (a free pass with no extra chips laid down, requiring all players to show 
their cards) or fold (quit the round).
Eyes on the pot 
The idea is to play the best combination of the cards available to you (two of 
your own, five on the table) to win the combined bets (the pot).
Winning hands 
Hands range from a pair to a full house (one pair plus three of a kind) to the 
majestic royal flush (ten, jack, queen, king and ace, in the same suit)
with various fiddly iterations in between.

Over to you: what games do you play with friends?

Henry Barnes bonded with (and betrayed) his friends over a game of poker, but 
what games do you play with your group?

We would love you to tell us all about your favourite games – real or made up 
– and how you play them. Chess, Twister, Risk, Absolute Balderdash, that game 
your mate invented where everyone shouts at someone doing a bad impression of 
something, whether it makes you laugh, fight or cry together, we want to know 
about it, so send in your pictures and stories.

The best contributions will feature in the March issue of Do Something, the 
Guardian's brand new monthly activities magazine. Please send hi-res images so 
that we can publish them in print.

email: do.something@theguardian.com
