
I leave my post as chief executive of the NHS Confederation 
<http://www.nhsconfed.org/> this week to return to being chief executive of an 
NHS foundation trust.

We are in the middle of ambitious change, moving to a world of looking at the 
whole person and of redefining health in terms of mental, physical and social 
issues. We want to deliver the triple aim of closing the health gap, the care 
gap and the finance gap in every part of England. This is a monumental task 
that fundamentally challenges the way care is designed and delivered. It will 
take time, resilience, resources, leadership and the commitment of 1.3 million
NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff and 1.5 million social care 
staff.

We are either witnessing the birthing pains of a new health and care system or 
the slow and painful demise of the NHS. Both outcomes are still in play. There 
are five steps my successor will need to take.

First, we have to continue with improvements to the national system of the 
Department ofHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and its arm’s 
length bodies. NHS Confederation members believe very strongly that the 
plethora of arm’s length bodies act in a contradictory way with conflicting 
policies that get in the way of change. We need a more coherent narrative, less 
intervention and a continued commitment to devolution. We need local solutions 
for local problems backed by national support. Critically, we need time to 
deliver change on the ground. We must back and nurture integration pioneers and 
NHS vanguards, and resist any move to the next fad or pilot programme.

Second, we must be honest about the money available. NHS spending is likely to 
fall per head of population and as a share of GDP by 2020. Social care spending 
will fall to less than 1% of GDP. The spending review and government commitment 
we lobbied for on behalf of our NHS members was tough for the NHS but could 
give us a fighting chance – yet this is now questionable. Social care pressures 
and public health budget cuts are bad social policy and bad economics. Instead 
of tackling the root causes, we have been left to fix the problem through our 
hospitals and health services.

Transformation and sustainability funds are a positive opportunity. Other 
areas have yet to see the benefits and holding the government to its 
commitments is a must. I have to highlightparity of esteem 
<http://www.centreformentalhealth.org.uk/parity-of-esteem> as one example where 
all groups were united in our2015 Challenge work 
<http://www.nhsconfed.org/health-topics/the-future-health-care-system/2015-challenge>
, yet political rhetoric has failed to translate into sufficient funding for 
mental health services across the country.

To realise the Five Year Forward View  
<https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/>we need local leadership, great 
commissioning and real investment in prevention, social care, primary care, 
community care and mental health.

Third, I strongly believe we must harness the power of communities, carers and 
patients. Our NHS Confederation Patients as Partners programme is starting to 
show how we can do this and the evidence is becoming unarguable. It can be 
challenging for us as providers but this may be the disruptive innovation that 
resets the deal between us, especially if we harness the power of technology in 
informing and connecting people.

Fourth, we need to rebuild the social contract with our staff and become a 
good employer. This is about more than pay and terms. This is the need to give 
our staff the genuine sense that we are looking after them and their careers.

The possibility of further strikes continues in the NHS. The government and 
NHS leaders must take stock on how we have reached this place. The NHS is made 
of people – not drugs, kit, buildings or committees. We should apply the same 
rigour to building a new approach with staff as we would with performance 
figures such as A&E targets.

Finally, we need to support leaders in the NHS. Faced with the variability, 
uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity they need to safely navigate through 
uncharted territory, with staff and citizens alongside them.

By moving back to the frontline, I become accountable for the safety of every 
patient and the value of every penny spent by South West Yorkshire partnership 
NHS foundation trust. I have also volunteered to be lead chief executive for 
creating the sustainability and transformation plan in West Yorkshire, which 
will demonstrate how the Five Year Forward View goes from political rhetoric to 
reality. I am willing to play my part – and I am clear that this is a great 
privilege. I will only succeed if the conditions are right that give birth to a 
new health and care system fit for the 21st century. We are not there yet and 
the alternative future of a slow and painful demise of the NHS cannot be 
allowed to happen. Whoever takes over here, the NHS Confederation has a key 
role to play in all our futures.



Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
