
The plan to force all schools into academy status has nothing to do with 
educational standards (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/27/the-guardian-view-on-schools-reform-bad-reasoning-poor-conclusion>
, 28 March). It is a ploy to hasten the unravelling of local democracy begun by 
Margaret Thatcher and pursued with varying degrees of enthusiasm by subsequent 
Tory governments, not least George Osborne’s squeeze on local financing.

The Tories want all power vested in Whitehall, especially funding, and are 
devoid of care and knowledge when it comes to understanding what schools and 
local communities want and need. If the current proposals are carried out, 
there will exist exactly the same pool of teachers, heads and pupils from which 
academies will have to recruit, with the same set of challenges. Given this, 
I’m puzzled as to how things will improve.

I worked as a teacher, headteacher and local education authority adviser for 
36 years and have inspected withOfsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>. For the past 10 years I’ve been 
a volunteer in my local LEA primary. I would be the last person to claim that 
LEAs are perfect. However, there is no question that overall they work for the 
greater good in so many ways that to abolish them would be sheer vandalism and 
a decision that would come back to bite any government. I want my LEA to remain 
in business and I want my county to remain intact, because it, too, has an 
overall beneficial effect on both schools and the wider community.
Richard Harris
Watlington, Oxfordshire

• Putting Nicky Morgan’s “no reverse gear” with George Osborne’s talk of 
irreversible change might be the first signal of the end of nudge economics and 
ideology by stealth. Yet her plans deconstruct on utterance. Has anyone 
scrutinised the economic impact analysis of this rush for academisation? Two 
questions emerge. The returns of existing academies are scant, so is there 
enough available investment for the hundreds of small trusts necessary? And if 
they are not viable then could Ofsted, as regulator, let them go ahead?
Jonathan Stanley
Grange-over-Sands, Cumbria

• It was Tony Blair, not Margaret Thatcher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher>, who famously claimed to 
have “no reverse gear”. Thatcher, in the same vein, claimed that she was “not 
for turning”. The reply to Morgan’s use of the Blair phrase is precisely what 
should have been made to him: “In that case you should not be on the road.”
Robin Wendt
Chester

• Nicky Morgan is quoted as saying: “I’ve never yet been on a doorstep where 
education has come up as an issue … If people think that elections are won or 
lost on local education matters, that isn’t happening” (Being a parent won’t 
make you a good governor, says Morgan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/25/nicky-morgan-education-parents-school-governors-academisation>
, 26 March). Perhaps, in her Tory enclave, all the doorsteps she visited were 
the homes of privately educated pupils. In the rest of the country, education 
is often the hottest of local issues. In my own council ward in Sheffield, 
Labour recently lost all its seats to the Lib Dems because of the Labour 
council’s plan to shut the local secondary school. It caused more trouble than 
any other issue in decades.

Local schools have been run by democratically elected local bodies since the 
school boards were created by the 1870 Education Act. That act required the 
state, for the first time, to provide a school place for every child. Thousands 
of new schools were created, and have since been run, at local level. No 
government in the ensuing 146 years has suggested that all of them should be 
taken out of local, democratically accountable, control – until now. It’s a 
hugely retrograde step, underpinned by the completely fallacious idea that 
local people don’t care about their schools.
Helen Mathers
Sheffield

• There is an interesting piece of evidence that is not yet evident in the 
debate about the announcement of the enforcement of universal academy schools (
Opinion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/21/schools-academies-democracy-educational-standards-accountability>
, 22 March).

Historically, local education authorities had teams of inspectors who were 
charged not only to inspect schools but also to deliver locally based 
consultancy, training and development. These inspectors were an important 
source of professional development of schools as organisations. Because they 
were based locally they were well aware of local cultures and peculiarities and 
could develop effective professional leadership with their teachers and heads. 
The most effective of these was with the Inner London Education Authority, 
destroyed in 1988 by Thatcher’s diktat. That authority’s chief inspector at one 
time was the distinguished academic David Hargreaves.

This dimension of local authority provision is suppressed in the debate that 
simply sees the administrative side of what local authorities could do. It 
suggests once more the lack of understanding of schools as learning 
organisations that weaves its way through the government’s thinking. I am not 
aware that it is a requirement that academy sponsors should supply such local 
professional support. Its existence is probably an inconvenient truth.
John Bazalgette
Honorary fellow, The Grubb School of Organisational Analysis

• The recent white paper requiring all schools to convert to academies by 2022 
is not only poorly conceived but, more worryingly, continues to be championed 
by the government despite a Department for Educationreport 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/schools-in-academy-chains-and-las-performance-measures>
 demonstrating that academies in England are outperformed in all aspects of 
pupil achievement – even when this is based upon their own convoluted 
performance rating system of value-added scores presented with confidence 
intervals. Based upon these findings, I am sure that all evidence-based 
practitioners would refute any pedagogical motive or wisdom in pursuing this 
course of action. This begs the somewhat rhetorical question: who stands to 
benefit from the asset-stripping of our education system, since current 
evidence suggests it will not be the country’s most important asset – our 
children?
Dr Jim Wiles
Canterbury

• Nicky Morgan proposes to exclude those without specialist skills and 
knowledge from being parent governors. On that basis perhaps she should exclude 
herself from the role of education secretary. Andrew Dilnot of the UK 
Statistics Authoritypointed out <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-30533044> 
that she had misled parliament because she did not understand literacy 
statistics when she claimed that under Labour a third of children left primary 
school unable to read or write. Anthony Seldon, a friend of Michael Gove and 
former headmaster of Wellington College,claimed 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/opinion/columnists/article4291586.ece> that she 
knows little about schools and accepted her education role reluctantly.
B White
Hertford

• I am sure the government hopes that as many of us as possible vote for our 
police commissioners on 5 May. When areDavid Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> and Nicky Morgan going to 
allow us all to vote for our regional schools commissioners as well? Surely 
that democratic right is of equal importance when it comes to our children’s 
education?
Janet Mansfield
Aspatria, Cumbria
