
My mother died in 2009. She intended her body to be used for medical science, 
but an unexpected problem made this impossible and funeral arrangements had to 
be made hurriedly and without careful thought. My father decided that she 
should be buried on their land. Due permissions were obtained and acceptance 
sought and gained from his near neighbours – a requirement in Scotland, where 
he lives.  

Shortly after the funeral, his neighbours said that they were no longer happy 
about the burial and wanted her exhumed and moved. For obvious reasons, this 
was neither desirable nor easily accomplished and the neighbours dropped their 
objection.

My father took great care to screen my mother’s grave from view and it is not 
possible to see the grave, which is some distance from their house and the 
boundary. Relations with his neighbours are good.

My father is elderly and, while generally in good health, could die at any 
time. It is his express wish to be buried with my mother. Neither of them was 
religious in any way.

The other day the neighbours spoke to a member of the family privately, and 
asked that we make sure that when he dies, he is not buried there because “the 
thought of two skeletons being there” disturbs them.

While I feel my neighbours’ view is irrational, that is how they feel. My 
father wishes to be buried with my mother and, again, while I feel his view is 
irrational, I fully understand. Even though it was a bad decision to inter my 
mother in the back garden (it’s vast, but still the back garden), I do respect 
my father’s wishes. My brothers and sisters tend towards being uber-pragmatic 
and the general view after my father’s death seems to be “dig ‘em up and 
cremate them, scatter the ashes”.

That would mean expressly going against my father’s wishes. I am too close to 
the problem to see the way clearly. We are a strong-willed family and my line 
in the sand is that my father’s final wishes should be carried out if at all 
possible. What do I do? 

You are being terrifically sensitive to everybody’s needs. I think a key part 
to your letter is in the first few lines. Your mother’s intentions were not to 
be buried in the garden but to donate her body to science, but because that 
wasn’t possible, and it was all rushed, your father “kept her close”. And now 
he wants to be buried with her even though she never expressed any wish to be 
buried in the back garden.

A solution is what your longer letter suggests you are tempted to do: sit down 
with your father calmly and talk this through. Go through the guidelines for 
home burial with him. An option would be to suggest your mum is exhumed and 
reburied somewhere else – maybe somewhere that meant a lot to her – or cremated 
and also “kept close” at home.

This could be done with a lovely ceremony – not rushed, but carefully thought 
out, and his place next to her (if she is buried) could be bought/reserved at 
the same time.

I wonder if this is less about where your mum actually is, than your father 
ultimately being near her? I think it’s really important to talk about this 
while your father is alive. I know people don’t like talking about death and 
burial, but it seems as if there is already a lot of talking going on in 
your family anyway, it just needs to include him.

I think being buried in a large back garden is a rather lovely thing to do but 
it does have, as you are seeing, practicalities. If your father will not shift 
in his wishes, then obviously it’s up to you as a family whether you fulfil 
them after his death. Like you, I would be uncomfortable not following through 
with a loved one’s last wishes. I do wonder, however, if part of his obstinance 
is to do with the fact that your mum never got her last wish?

Being fixated on one’s own funeral/burial arrangements can sometimes be a sign 
of fear. Fear leads to trying to over control situations.

As you’ve seen, there are no specific restraints on home burial in Scotland, 
as long as guidelines are followed. Visit the South Ayrshire website at
south-ayrshire.gov.uk 
<http://www.south-ayrshire.gov.uk/births-marriages-deaths/cemeteries/homeburials.aspx>
 for more information on this.

Your neighbours do not have redress unless the burial (or a future one) went 
against these guidelines and it is now causing a nuisance or public health 
issues (the guidelines go into more detail), although I appreciate you do not 
want to fall out with them. I suspect they are worried about the resale value 
of their house. You will have to mention the burial in a future house sale and 
that may make selling it more difficult (prospective buyers may also need to 
tell their mortgage company). You also mention keeping the portion of land your 
mother is buried on; this would help deal with things like being able to 
visit as long as you had access to the burial site.

I’ve put two useful links for you below, not least Cruse. I wonder if your 
father needs to talk through his bereavement with someone outside the family?

cruse.org.uk <http://www.cruse.org.uk/>; naturaldeath.org.uk 
<http://www.naturaldeath.org.uk/index.php?page=home-burial>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
