
Controversial plans to force all state schools in England to become academies 
have been dropped only days after the education secretary,Nicky Morgan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan>, insisted they would go 
ahead.

On the day of election declarations across the UK, the Department for 
Education (DfE) said that plans to force through the policy by 2022 would not 
now be included in the forthcoming Queen’s speech, arguing: “It is not 
necessary to bring legislation to bring about blanket conversion of all schools 
to achieve this goal.”

In a statement on Friday, Morgan said: “I am today reaffirming our 
determination to see all schools become academies. However, having listened to 
the feedback fromparliamentary colleagues 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/23/tory-mps-call-for-academies-plan-dropped-from-queens-speech>
 and theeducation sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/29/headteachers-union-chief-slams-government-over-academisation-policy>
, we will now change the path to reaching that goal.”

Instead, the new legislation will include sweeping powers for the DfE to force 
schools in “underperforming” local authorities to convert to academy status. 
Those councils with successful track records will be able to continue to 
maintain their local schools.

The abrupt change was praised by Conservative-led local authorities which had 
been vocal critics of the original plan.

Ray Gooding, the cabinet member for education on the Tory-led Essex county 
council who opposed the 2022 deadline, said: “We would much rather schools 
continue to choose for themselves whether to go down the academy route and I am 
pleased the government has listened.”

Related: Being a parent is not enough to be a school governor, says Nicky 
Morgan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/25/nicky-morgan-education-parents-school-governors-academisation>

There will be a new provision for “unviable” local authorities to ask the DfE 
to convert schools into academies if the council can no longer support them.

The U-turn over the 2022 deadline is something of a humiliation for Morgan, 
who is said to have been bounced into backing the policy by No 10 advisers 
eager to move the political conversation away from the economy and EU 
referendum.

But the proposal immediately attracted opposition from across the political 
spectrum, including Tory MPs concerned that small rural schools would have to 
close, and Conservative councils such as Hampshire and Oxfordshire that were 
proud of their success with local schools.

Lucy Powell, the shadow education secretary, said: “It is frankly a 
humiliating climbdown for David Cameron and his education secretary, who just 
weeks ago were insisting they would plough on with the policy regardless.

“There remain enormous challenges facing our schools under the Tories, and 
their fixation with structures has distracted school leaders and created panic 
in the schools system at the expense of raising standards.

“Ministers must urgently tackle the serious problems they have created in 
education, including school budgets falling in real terms for the first time in 
20 years, chronic shortages of teachers, not enough good school places, and 
chaos and confusion in the exams system.”

Conservative MPs who led backbench opposition were also quick to embrace the 
reversal.


Graham Brady, the chair of the 1922 committee of backbenchers, said: “It was 
clearly the right thing to to do and that has improved the proposals before the 
legislation was published.”


Graham Stuart, the former education committee chair who led a chorus of 
unhappy Tory MPs to broach the education secretary, said the decision was 
sensible and praised Morgan “for working closely with colleagues”.

However, the white paper still includes contentious plans removing the right 
of parents to be represented on academy boards of governors and radical 
proposals allowing head teachers to award staff qualifications.

Despite the setback, the DfE said it expected the rate of academy conversions 
to increase, bolstered by the Education and Adoption Act that came into force 
in March, giving the department extra powers to intervene in “coasting” schools 
and have them taken over by academy sponsors.

“We will also continue to support good schools to convert and to take the lead 
in supporting other schools as part of multi-academy trusts. In the last 
monthly figures, 227 schools put in applications to convert, the highest 
monthly figure since the programme began and we expect this rate to increase,” 
the DfE said.

The plan to wipe out council-maintained schools by 2022 was first announced in 
the budget by the chancellor, George Osborne, and detailed in the education 
white paper published shortly afterwards by Morgan.

The education secretary continued to back the proposal in the face of 
gathering protests, telling MPs on the education committee last week that she 
was “fully committed” to it. On Saturday, she told a meeting of headteachers 
that the 2022 deadline was needed “to give you all a clear sense of direction”.

Related: Nicky Morgan warns teachers: no 'reverse gear' for academies plan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/26/nicky-morgan-academies-teachers-what-works-in-classrooms-nasuwt>

The move was bitterly opposed by the teaching unions, including the moderate 
National Association of Head Teachers, where adelegate at last weekend’s 
conference 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/30/primary-school-tests-not-about-pass-or-fail-nicky-morgan>
 asked Morgan: “If my school is a good school, why does it need to become an 
academy?”

Russell Hobby, the general secretary of the NAHT, said it was compulsion 
rather than academy status to which members objected. “We can have a much 
better conversation about academies in this new climate,” he said.

Roy Perry of the Local Government Association said: “We are delighted that the 
government is listening to our strong opposition to forced academisation, which 
has been echoed by MPs, teachers and parents and backed up by evidence.”

The government’s budget announcement climbdowns

Tax credits George Osborne dropped plans to cut tax credits in the autumn 
statement after a rebellion by Tory backbenchers and opposition in the House of 
Lords.

Disability benefit The Treasury did an about-turn on cuts on the night that 
Iain Duncan Smith resigned as work and pensions secretary, complaining that 
they should not have been juxtaposed with tax cuts for the better-off in the 
budget.

VAT on tampons Ministers had previously insisted that it was impossible to 
scrap the tampon tax under EU laws, but Cameron claimed he had persuaded fellow 
European leaders to think again after raising it at a summit.

Sunday trading The plan to let shops open longer on Sundays was taken to a 
vote and rejected by Labour, the SNP and some backbench Tory MPs, forcing the 
government to abandon the plan.

Child refugees The government repeatedly refused to receive 3,000 child 
refugees from Europe but it capitulated and agreed to take some after the House 
of Lords and MPs within its own party asked it to think again for a second time.

Academies It was a flagship announcement at the budget but it was once again 
backbenchConservatives <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>, 
combined with councils, who forced Downing Street to water down the proposal.

Pension tax relief The Treasury was mulling reforms of pensions to end tax 
relief for higher earners but this was killed off before it was even announced 
by signs that backbenchers would not let it pass.Rowena Mason
