
A warm autumn will ensure that some perennials retain their foliage well into 
winter, such as this crocosmia, which isn't turned to mush by the first frosts

The Yoshino cherry, Prunus x yedoensis, has pale pink flowers in spring, 
followed by red fruit and then excellent autumn colour, making it a good 
all-rounder

This Dolphin bridge started life as a fountain. It was given a new life in 
this part of the garden after being rescued from a small lake

The flowering fern, Osmunda regalis, favours the water's edge in boggy ground 
where it can stomach full sun. The fronds turn golden yellow in autumn and 
should remain all winter

Berries are an important ingredient of any autumn and winter garden - 
Cotoneaster horizontalis produces thousands and has fiery, autumn foliage

Perennials and shrubs are essential in any garden to control views and to 
guide people around, offering them enticing glimpses of what lies ahead. Yet 
this tier of planting beneath trees is the first thing to go when a garden is 
neglected. Little remained of Cholmondeley Castle's grand formal gardens, 
dating from the late 17th century, when Lady Cholmondeley took them on after 
the second world war. There were some good trees, a few rhododendrons, remnants 
of two water gardens and not much else in this Cheshire garden apart from the 
views.

The pampas grass and some fairly substantial Chamaecyparis conifers give clues 
to the period in which the gardens began their renaissance: renowned plantsman 
James Russell offered his advice in the 60s and the gardens have been taking 
shape ever since, under Lady Cholmondeley's guidance. The Temple Garden 
(pictured) is the centrepiece and is known for providing year-round colour that 
peaks in the autumn.

Two temples, including a late 19th-century rotunda and a much earlier 
building, have been rescued from the original grounds and relocated here. It 
shows how a new garden can be imprinted on to the bones of the old. Although 
these gardens run to 40 acres, the principles are much the same for more modest 
grounds.
