
Name: Fat.

AKA: Triglycerides.

Appearance: Three fatty acid chains attached to a glycerol molecule.

And if you zoom out a bit? Greasy/delicious.

Mmmm… greasy/delicious. But is it healthy? Asking that question demonstrates 
that you don’t understand what “healthy” means.

Giving that answer demonstrates why you have no friends. Look, the point is 
that there are many different kinds of dietary fat, each of them with different 
effects on the body, effects that, in turn, vary according to how much of them 
you eat, which other things you eat, and the genetic, behavioural and other 
circumstances of your life.

Couldn’t you just say: “It depends”? I could, but then you wouldn’t understand 
the full complexity of public nutrition.

Who says I want to? Just tell me what the experts have decided. Mostly, that 
they hate each other.

Eh? The National Obesity Forum <http://www.nationalobesityforum.org.uk> has 
just published a reportclaiming that government advice to cut down on fat is 
having “disastrous health consequences” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/22/official-advice-to-eat-low-fat-diet-is-wrong-says-health-charity>
. “The change in dietary advice to promote low-fat foods is perhaps the biggest 
mistake in modern medical history,” says Dr Aseem Malhotra, a senior NOF 
adviser.

Is he right? No, according to Public Health England’s chief nutritionist, Dr 
Alison Tedstone <http:>. “It’s a risk to the nation’s health when potentially 
influential voices suggest people should eat a high-fat diet, especially 
saturated fat,” she says, pointing out thatofficial advice 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/Goodfood/Pages/Fat.aspx> is based on a lot more 
studies than the NOF’s.

That’s Dr Aseem Malhotra told! It probably isn’t. The NOF report claims that 
the science behind the official guidelines has been “corrupted by commercial 
influences”.

Take that Big, um, Farmer! Except Professor Simon Capewell from the Faculty of 
Public Health denies it. “By contrast,” he adds, “the report from the National 
Obesity Forum is not peer-reviewed. Furthermore, it does not indicate who wrote 
it or how is was funded.” The British Heart Foundation are on his side as well.

Look, can I jam my head into a bucket of doughnuts or can’t I? Go for it. Just 
not too often.

How often is too often? Well it’s complicated and we don’t really know.

Argh! Sorry.

Do say: Just eat a balanced diet, stay a healthy weight and do regular 
exercise.

No really, just say: Eat a balanced diet, stay a healthy weight and do regular 
exercise.
