
The recipe 

Peel, roughly chop and boil 500g of potatoes in deep, lightly salted water for 
15-20 minutes until tender enough to mash. Remove the core from 250g of spring 
cabbage, then roughly chop the leaves and wash them. Cook the cabbage in a 
saucepan with a little boiling water then drain thoroughly.

Slice 3 spring onions finely, discarding any tough dark green leaves as you 
go. Chop 8 tbsp of herbs. I used dill, mint, tarragon and parsley – but it will 
depend what you have around. Wash a couple of handfuls of watercress, shake 
them dry and set aside.

Drain the potatoes thoroughly, add 40g of butter then mash them using a food 
mixer fitted with a flat paddle, or with a potato masher. Fold the drained 
spring cabbage, well drained of any liquid, and the herbs into the potato 
together with a little ground black pepper.

Roll the mixture into 9 balls or thick patties, using a little flour on your 
hands if necessary. Warm a thin layer of olive oil and a little butter in a 
shallow, nonstick pan over a moderate heat, then lower in the patties, letting 
them cook for 5 or 6 minutes until pale gold and lightly crisp on the 
underside. Turn each over and brown the other side.

Divide the watercress among 3 plates then add the sizzling patties. Serves 2-3.

The trick 

Traditionally, bubble and squeak was a way to use up leftover vegetables from 
the Sunday roast, but I think it is worth making from scratch, with freshly 
mashed potatoes and crisp spring greens. Drain the potatoes thoroughly, to 
avoid a wet mash. Wring the greens lightly in your fist – this is important - 
to squeeze out any excess water.

The twist 

I like this made with pale green early summer cabbage, but also try cavolo 
nero or tenderstem broccoli. The mixture of herbs is up to you. Parsley is a 
must, but any soft-stemmed herbs can be used. Avoid thyme, sage and rosemary 
here and go for the tender herbs such as tarragon, mint, fennel fronds and dill.

Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater 
<https://twitter.com/NigelSlater?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
