
The dilemma I have been dating a wonderful man for a year and a half. Our kids 
are grown and we have both had previous marriages. My father passed away last 
March and in his will he left me his home in another part of the country. I 
decided to move there. The thing is, the house is more than 30 years old and 
needs a lot of work. So far I’ve paid a large amount in renovations and there 
is still a lot to do. The house will remain in my name, and I will leave it for 
my children. So it’s one thing to split bills but, as he is now living with me, 
and I’m paying for updating the house, should he help with the renovation 
costs? I can’t figure out what is fair here.

Mariella replies What’s fair in life is a loaded question. They say money 
makes the world go round, but its mere mention can also draw the carousel of 
love to an abrupt halt. There’s nothing more mundane and conversely more taboo 
than money. Most of us would be happier to share bodily fluids with another 
human than be transparent about our earnings to them. Just look at the jitters 
being caused by the imminent disclosure of how company salaries differ between 
the sexes. It’s taken four and a half decades of injustice, such is the veil 
drawn over finance, to precipitate this revolutionary reveal. Yet the naming 
and shaming of those who fail to live up to the Equal Pay Act has plenty to 
offer both sexes. Find me one dad who doesn’t believe his daughter should earn 
the same as the dreary bloke on the desk opposite.

Sometimes I wonder if the money market isn’t a great conspiracy. The same 
could be said of cash, which if you break it down is really just an elevated 
form of barter. The accrual of hard currency is often as dependent on luck and 
timing as it is on skill – oligarchs, drug barons, tax dodgers, career 
criminals and celebrities all offering perfect evidence that wealth creation is 
seldom something to be particularly proud of.

Most of us would be happier to share bodily fluids with another human than be 
transparent about our earnings

I’ve certainly met far more poverty-stricken geniuses than I’ve encountered 
impressive millionaires in my lifetime. Poverty is crippling and lack of money 
reduces our opportunities and makes the path through life seem much harder to 
progress smoothly along. Too much money seems to have a similarly reductive 
effect on those not compelled to make a living, and in-between are the billions 
of us who fret, obsess and just about manage to keep afloat by working hard, 
counting the pennies and not letting anyone take our hard living for granted.

You and your partner are lucky you have so little on the financial front to 
prompt discord between you. Solvent and mature, both sets of children gone and 
a fully paid-off roof over your heads leaves only who does the dishes and other 
minor domestic dilemmas to quarrel over. You may feel you’ve got a tricky 
dilemma but ultimately it’s about maintaining a sense of equality between you, 
and that makes it easier to resolve.

The obvious thing to ascertain is what the law has to say on the subject, as 
ultimately that’s where the greatest problem might arise. If you’re together 
long enough there may well be grounds for your partner to be entitled to a 
share of your estate, so before you turn the discussion into an emotional one, 
get the facts right on where you stand. So long as you’re investing in a home, 
which remains yours alone, and his tenure doesn’t come with rights attached to 
it, it seems perfectly fair for it to be your investment responsibility. The 
fact that he’s undertaking some of the work with no expectation of recompense 
suggests he’s a good guy with a sense of gratitude to you for the home comforts 
you’re providing.

It would also be a good idea to ponder on why it’s an issue for you. Does this 
desire to have him contribute more mask a general sense of dissatisfaction with 
his investment in the relationship? If so that’s an area you’ll need to give 
further thought to. Often money is a convenient stick with which to beat 
someone for altogether different reasons.

Having grown up in poverty I know all too well the pit-of-the-stomach sickness 
that can be inspired by fear of return to penury and also the unattractive but 
hard-to-cure habit of chasing mammon instead of less mercenary pleasures. 
Aren’t you lucky to have a roof over your head that’s guaranteed for your 
lifetime and can extend into your children’s? And isn’t it typically human that 
here you are wanting more? Ultimately, good fortune to share with someone you 
love is to be cherished rather than resented. As the saying goes, we can’t take 
it with us. My advice would be to check the fine print and then enjoy your 
blessings and the benefits they bring to those around you.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/21/mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>
.Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
