
The Department for Education, trumpeting its controversial new bill, which 
aims to speed up academisation of schools deemed by Ofsted to be inadequate, 
last week lined up six heads of academy chains to comment. Unsurprisingly, they 
were all positive about the benefits of academy status in the DfE’spress release
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/up-to-1000-failing-schools-to-be-transformed-under-new-measures>
.

We had a look at the records of the quoted chains. The largest of the six is 
Reach2, which sponsors 29 schools. Only 10 have so far been inspected. Of 
these, five are rated as “requires improvement”, with the remaining five 
designated “good”. Four of the nine academies that replaced an existing 
non-academy have improved on the predecessor school’s rating, but the remaining 
five have an Ofsted judgment under Reach2 that is no better than that of its 
predecessor school.

We do wonder why sponsored academy status is being promoted as the only way 
forward.

Reach2’s latest accounts [pdf] 
<http://apps.charitycommission.gov.uk/Accounts/Ends00/0001149000_AC_20130831_E_C.pdf>
 show consultancy firms controlled by two trustees – Dean Ashton and Mark Elms 
– were paid £78,949 and £78,031 respectively by Reach2 in 2012-13.

A Reach2 spokeswoman said none of its schools was now in special measures; two 
are graded “good”, having been “inadequate”; and 94% of its academies had 
improved their Sats results. She added: “[2012-13] was our first year of 
operation … we initially built capacity through the use of consultants. These 
individuals were invited to be trustees and their consultancy contracts 
concluded.”

Staff feel the burn


One senior head quoted in the DfE’s promotional material for the new bill was 
Rachel de Souza, chief executive of the Norwich-based Inspiration Trust chain. 
“A fresh start as an academy brings hope and new energy to staff and pupils,” 
De Souza said.

Inspiration Trust has had some good Ofsted verdicts. But it seems the “energy” 
of some staff has been directed towards the exit door.

News reaches us of high turnover rates of teachers at at least two of its 
schools: Great Yarmouth primary academy (GYPA) and Cobholm primary academy, 
both led by executive head, Craig Avieson.

Scott Lyons, joint division secretary of Norfolk’s NUT, says: “There is a 
massive turnover of staff at Cobholm in particular.” Cobholm and Great 
Yarmouth’s eagerness to fill vacancies has appeared to be underlined by an
advertisement 
<http://www.inspirationtrust.org/our_schools/cobholm_primary_academy/about_us/vacancies/>
 that seeks teachers ready to start “as soon as possible” in either school.

On Friday, the Great Yarmouth Mercury 
<http://www.greatyarmouthmercury.co.uk/news/education/parents_pull_children_out_of_great_yarmouth_school_amid_concerns_after_academy_switch_1_4100292>
 reported that parents were removing their children from Cobholm because of the 
disruptive effects of a “changing rota of supply teachers”.

In January, Avieson tweeted a picture of staff doing aerobics during their 
morning meeting, under the message “committed staff @gypa focusing on our core 
value of positivity, with aerobics for morning briefing #whateverittakes”. We 
understand this may not have been universally appreciated.

All 12 Inspiration Trust schools have seen their headteacher change, so 
perhaps not much “hope” here for existing leadership teams when schools are 
taken over.

Ian Burchett, Inspiration Trust’s commercial director, replies: “Leadership 
change can often bring about wider staff change. All of us at the trust are 
dedicated to supporting and energising staff to improve teaching. At the 
moment, for September there are four vacancies in Cobholm and one at GYPA; work 
is in hand to ensure these posts are filled and there is no impact on pupils.”

No route out?


We understand from legal firm Browne Jacobson that the education bill will 
deny schools the right to appeal if they are unfortunate enough to be handed a 
warning notice about their performance.

At the moment, only local authorities can issue the notices, which can herald 
school leadership change, but schools have the right to appeal to Ofsted. Katie 
Michelon, a solicitor at the firm, said schools she worked with on appeals were 
generally successful, often arguing local authorities had not followed 
procedures correctly.

Losing this right will leave a daunting judicial review as schools’ only 
outlet, Michelon says. “This makes me nervous that there will be no route for 
schools wanting to contest the fairness of a notice.” The bill would also see 
the secretary of state able to issue a warning notice herself.

A DfE spokesman said the removal of appeals was part of the bill’s plan to 
“remove loopholes” that caused schools to “languish” in low Ofsted categories 
too long.

Going full circle


Is this how education accountability now works? Having been made redundant 
from an academy, for which you feel the school had not followed procedures 
correctly, you and a colleague write to the regional schools commissioner (RSC) 
about the way it is run.

You make a string of allegations, including that the school spent nearly 
£100,000 on supply staff to cover colleagues attending meetings, nearly £50,000 
spent on settlement agreements with “gagging clauses” to staff and even the 
manipulation of pupil attendance records.

You write that, with the advent of academies in your area, no one is 
answerable or accountable for what goes on in them.

After a few weeks, you get a response, not from the RSC but the Education 
Funding Agency (EFA), which oversees academies. The letter says the allegations 
have been passed to it, that it is considering an investigation but that it may 
not be able to update you about it.

You then hear nothing for six months. Then, when this column contacts the DfE, 
a response comes back. The issue is being investigated. Only not by the EFA, 
but by the academy chain running the school. The one you were concerned about 
in the first place.

The investigation is to be run by the chain, but with “independent oversight 
from the EFA”. A report may or may not be published, with a decision to be made 
“in due course”. So that’s all OK, then.
