
Your leader is right to draw attention to executive behaviour at the heart of 
the BHS scandal but to see this in terms of a moral vacuum is to misunderstand 
the nature of human behaviour (“BHS and the moral vacuum in big business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/05/the-observer-view-on-the-closure-of-bhs>
”, Comment).

Rather than deploring the owners’ apparent lack of moral scruple, let us 
instead ask from where the sense of propriety that defines our current crop of 
business titans draws its strength.

Modern economics teaches many things that are of dubious merit but the idea 
that shipbuilding, steel manufacture, high street retail or healthcare are just 
different forms of money-making is the most insidious. Until the Chicago school 
economic principles that define our culture are overturned then no amount of 
talk of corporate social responsibility will put things right.
Dr William Dixon
London
Dr David Wilson
Walton-on-the-Naze
Essex

The problem with BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> and other big 
businesses is the structure of company law that is based on allowing owners to 
do as they please with no legal duties to the interests of staff, suppliers or 
customers, provided this is approved by the AGM.

So far as I understand it, owners are able to take capital out of the firm for 
their short-term advantage, even if this leaves the company with insufficient 
resources to invest in the future of the firm, provided the firm is not trading 
as insolvent. What is needed is a wholesale reform of company law, adopting the 
German model that places a duty on company owners to take into account the 
interests of staff and suppliers as well as customers. The German legal 
structure of staff – not necessarily trade union – representation on 
supervisory boards as well as on remuneration committees is long overdue.

I see no evidence that such a reformed model of company law reduces either 
investment or long-term profitability. It would stop some owners of companies 
from taking short-term actions that take unacceptable risks with the long term 
viability of business.
Jeremy Ross
Ashtead
Surrey

It is perfectly possible that the outcome of the two Commons committees 
investigating BHS, just as with tax dodging in Panama, will be that nothing 
illegal has taken place. So the people “who can just walk on to yachts” having 
taken “money out of the business that wasn’t there to be taken” will simply 
continue to do so, while those “who have mortgages and shop at Asda” will lose 
their jobs and be forced to accept reduced pensions, shedding light on 
why inequality is growing in the UK.
 

David Murray
Wallington
Surrey

Excellent leader on the BHS situation. The behaviour of both Green and 
Chappell has been appalling but the greatest worry is that the system has 
allowed them to get away with it. In my opinion, Philip Green should never have 
been given a knighthood. Last Sunday, I changed to theObserver, having read the 
Sunday Timesfor a number of years. A good choice it seems from my first read.
Christine Williams
Swansea
