
It’s something that has gripped the whole industry. The investigation into 
media rebates doesn’t quite name and shame (now that would have been 
interesting) – but the Association of National Advertisers has suggested that
many media outlets are implicated 
<https://www.ana.net/content/show/id/pr-media-transparency>, and I imagine that 
there will be some uncomfortable client conversations happening over the next 
few days if they haven’t happened already.


It’s the elephant in the room – to date, the biggest media agencies have been 
in an incredibly powerful position that is beyond trust with clients. 
Generally, they are working with very large sums of money, and control most of 
the data on return on investment. They are also, again generally, working 
without too much day-to-day challenge or competition.

There is a common state of affairs amongst the ‘big four’ networks – they 
offer all of the strategic, creative and media advice under one, tangled 
networked web. There is no option to choose a media partner that is better 
suited to the brief, or a client’s business. You keep it in the family.

Don’t get me wrong – at iris we have solid partnerships with media agencies. 
Some we’ve worked with for years. But that partnership is based on them being 
the right match for the client and the brief, and to deliver on the same 
ambition for a campaign. It’s also based on knowing when paid for media is, and 
more importantly isn’t, a necessity or even part of the answer.

In the rapidly changing consumer world, there is a growing discrepancy between 
what has a real impact with people, and what traditional media tells us should 
have impact. This varies audience to audience. Likes vs shares, what actually 
constitutes a view or engagement with an idea, and how this affects both soft 
and hard business metrics.

We have very deliberately built a business that places participation at the 
heart of what we do for clients, recognising that paid for media is becoming 
more of a commodity, and that the rules governing it remain decidedly murky.

The term ROI should consider much more – defining a “return on involvement” to 
better evaluate the increasingly complex array of channels/ideas/platforms/ 
spheres of influence we operate in.

With the emergence of this ANA report, I really can’t see how clients can 
possibly give the ad agencies and the media agencies so much trust (and budget 
responsibility) without more challenges, more checks and better balances.

Will we some brands challenging their agency portfolios to see how they can 
make ideas travel further with less focus on paid for media? And will we see 
clients start to reward great creativity with greater budgets, rather than 
allowing budgets to drive mediocre work? The jury is still out on that one.

Of course, I’m hoping that this report does something to challenge the norm of 
the industry, and what most consider to be an outdated media model. In my view, 
modern creative agencies should be separate and independent from the world of 
media. This allows for the best collaborations between agencies to happen, if 
and when it’s right for the brand rather than when it’s right for the pockets 
of the network shareholders.

Ian Millner is co-founder and chief executive of iris Worldwide 
<http://www.iris-worldwide.com/>

This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media & Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.

