
My need to write to you stems from my insecurity and selfishness, but also 
from the need for you to know you are a better person than I will ever be. At 
first I didn’t think of you too much. You were “his problem”, just a concept, 
removed from reality. I never saw you, I didn’t know anything about you – and I 
didn’t care. Driven by lust and newly discovered sensations, an insatiable wish 
to be with him every moment, nothing and no one else mattered. He was the love 
of my life and we were going to be together, no matter what.

That first night I spent in his house, the tyre tracks of your car were still 
visible in the snow on the driveway. The bed was made with fresh linen, and 
that was all we wanted and needed. It was just the two of us, giddy with love 
and exhilarated about what the future would hold for us.

You were the last person I thought of. You got the money, the holiday house 
and full custody. Apparently, you did not contest at court and left the house 
quietly; just a few belongings still in the garage, ready to be sent on at a 
more convenient time.

After the first few weeks, I started to notice things. A half empty tube of 
Nivea hand cream in the corner of the bathroom cabinet. A pair of well-worn 
slippers at the bottom of the shoe cupboard. A small ornament in the shape of a 
flying bird above the mantle, a souvenir of a forgotten family holiday. On the 
wall behind a radiator, a clumsily drawn car in a green crayon.

There was a plastic bucket, neatly filled with cleaning products and clean 
dust cloths under the kitchen sink. My first reaction was to mock your 
tidiness, your organised ways, so completely different from mine. I moved the 
bucket and hidden behind it was an ashtray. It crossed my mind that you would 
sneak out to the patio to have a secret cigarette now and again, as he objects 
to it so much.

It hit me. All of a sudden, I felt like an intruder. This was your house. 
Slight sadness crept into my heart every time I discovered traces of your 
presence and it tinged my happiness. The feelings of guilt and shame came 
later, and it is important I tell you this.

All of a sudden, I felt overwhelmed with shame and acute awareness of your 
feelings

You pulled up unexpectedly on a foggy evening a few weeks after I moved in. We 
heard the garage door open and, all of a sudden, there you stood in the middle 
of the crates and boxes filled with your summer sandals, slightly used crockery 
from your wedding list, and children’s toys. You left the trunk of the car open 
and intended to cram the boxes into it. Gallantly, he jumped to give you a 
hand. As you dismissed his offer through gritted teeth, you looked up from the 
boxes, straight into my eyes. That took me by surprise. I couldn’t hide from 
you.

You were not at all what I imagined; slender in tight jeans and feline-eyed, 
your sadness, betrayal and anger all etched in the lines around your mouth.

All of a sudden, I felt overwhelmed with shame and acute awareness of your 
feelings. I did this to you and there you were; standing proud and tall and on 
the verge of breaking down. Then there was the last box, filled with cuddly 
toys. Although the tears started to draw lines from mascara down your cheeks, 
not one offensive word crossed your lips, not one move betrayed your inner 
turmoil. And I just stood there; at first curious, then strangely moved by your 
pride and, finally, mortified by the thought that I had caused this suffering.

I want you to know that I noticed all this and admired you silently for your 
ability to stay calm and composed, wiping tears with the end of your sleeve. I 
want you to know that the glance you threw at me hurt like a dart. And I knew 
it was the least I deserved. I want you to know that I may have my man, but I 
will never possess your patience, morals or silent dignity.

Anonymous
