
Q I'm 5ft 2in, size 10 and just turned 30, and I'm looking for the perfect 
black winter coat. I want something everyday that can be dressed up for 
evening. Full-length coats don't work with my height, so three-quarter length 
or shorter would be best, without too much detailing. I'm prepared to spend 
around £400.
Clare

A Your preferred length shouldn't be a problem - there are a multitude of 
shapes and styles this year. For £400, you can include the designer diffusion 
lines, labels like See by Chloe and Miu Miu. There's a great double-breasted 
above-the-knee coat by Marc by Marc Jacobs (£415). It has contrasting 
stitching, marble-effect buttons, and a back vent and side pockets that give a 
good silhouette (www.net-a-porter.com <http://www.net-a-porter.com>). Paul and 
Joe is worth a visit for understated coats. Check out the double-breasted swing 
coat with princess collar for £425 (www.paulandjoe.com 
<http://www.paulandjoe.com>). If you are based in London, I'd suggest a visit 
to Fenwick or Liberty for focused coat shopping.

Q I really want to wear a hat. I love the cloche styles I've seen in magazines 
and I even saw one in Zara, but was too chicken to buy it. I've been told hats 
suit me, but you hardly ever see women wearing them, and I don't want people to 
stare at me. Should I go for it?
 Lauren

A Fashion's leading man, Marc Jacobs, opened his show with an outfit topped 
with a hat, and from that moment I knew we were due a revival. The hat had 
fallen off the fashion radar prior to the autumn/winter shows, but if you're 
ever going to sport a hat, this is the season to do it. Test the waters with a 
simple style such as a DKNY beret or floppier Flemish beret seen at Louis 
Vuitton. If you feel comfortable, try a statement hat like the Marc Jacobs 
multi-coloured knitted crown with narrow brim. Make sure your headwear suits 
your wardrobe - if your look is casual or sporty, opt for something like the 
mohair cap by Luella; if you love ladylike chic, then Proenza Shouler's moulded 
felt styles should suit. Above all, wear it with confidence.

·  If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
