
The Brazilian equivalent of the British expression "Just my cup of tea" is "é 
minha praia" ('That's my beach"), which tells you all you need to know about 
the two countries' relative cultural values. Brazilians can talk for hours 
about their favourite strip, nowhere is more closely associated with the beach 
as lifestyle than Brazil, and golden sands provide many of the country's 
cultural icons: The Girl from Ipanema, Havaianas, fio dental ("dental floss") 
bikinis, Copacabana ...

With 8,000km of coastline and thousands of beaches to choose from – most of 
them lying beneath palm trees in the tropics – we asked 10 experts to choose 
their favourites, from a river beach in the Amazon down to one of the country's 
hippest beach cities, Florianópolis. And if we've missed out your favourite, 
we'd like to hear from you.

1. Alter do Chao, Pará

Tom Phillips, The Guardian's Brazil correspondent

Brazil's best beach is not in Rio de Janeiro or the sun-bathed north-east. 
It's not even on the coast. It is on a river at the heart of the Amazon 
rainforest. Around 30km from the rainforest city ofSantarem 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santar%C3%A9m,_Brazil>, Alter do Chao is the 
jungle's answer to the Caribbean. After a week holed up in the jungle, Alter do 
Chao is the perfect place to relax: you can lounge on the river beaches in the 
morning, gorge yourself on a local grilled fish in the afternoon and retreat to 
one of the area's many charming pousadas by night. People often call the humid 
and dense Amazon the "green inferno". Alter do Chao is its golden paradise.

• Where to stay: Pousada Tupaiulandia (+55 93 3527 1157, no website) is not 
very expensive and pretty small, like all places in Alter do Chao, but has a 
lot of character.

2. Fernando de Noronha

 Douglas Vieira, São Paulo journalist

Paradise is the word most commonly used to describe Fernando de Noronha 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/sep/10/brazil.wildlifeholidays>, an 
archipelago 350km off the north-east coast of Brazil. Finding a nice beach is 
an easy task on the small volcanic island, but visiting three is mandatory: 
Praia do Sancho, which is reached through a crack in a rock wall; Baía dos 
Porcos (Pig's Bay), a place of astonishing beauty and great for swimming; and 
Atalaia, a natural saltwater pool with abundant sea life. All have translucent 
waters, and because tourist numbers to the islands are strictly monitored, it 
is easy to spot turtles, octopuses, a plethora of fish and even sharks. The 
food chain in Noronha is well preserved, so sharks are less dangerous here 
there than elsewhere.

• Where to stay: Pousada Topázio <http://www.pousadatopazio.com.br>.

3. Praia do Toque, Alagoas

Ricardo Freire, author of 100 Praias Que Valem a Viagem (100 Beaches You Must 
Visit)

São Miguel dos Milagres fringes 15km of beaches protected both by reefs and 
the lack of a highway – the main coastal road turns inland, and only those in 
the know take the local road that leads to a forest of coconut trees and 
scattered villages. The sea is always warm; up to 36ºC at low tide in 
mid-afternoon - thalassotherapy for free! Set up base at Praia do Toque and 
walk the sands nearby. Twenty minutes north is Tatuamunha river, a sanctuary 
for manatees. Forty minutes south are two picture-perfect crescents: São Miguel 
and Praia do Riacho. At low tide hire a jangadeiro (a small traditional fishing 
boat) and head to the tidal pools.

• Where to stay: Pousada do Toque <http://www.pousadadotoque.com.br>, the 
region's pioneers.Pousada do Caju <http://www.pousadadocaju.com> is also good, 
and cheaper. SeeRicardo's blog <http://tinyurl.com/c944pf> (in Portuguese).

4. Taipus de Fora, Maraú peninsula, Bahia

Conor O'Sullivan, founder of  Tatur <http://www.tatur.com.br> travel agency

The 1,100km coastline of the state of Bahia is speckled with spectacular 
beaches. I love long beach walks and my favourite is Taipus de Fora on the 
Maraú Peninsula. The long sweep of beach ends at a headland where beautiful 
reef pools are exposed by the receding tide, revealing a huge naturally 
sheltered pool, offering wonderful snorkelling and tropical fish. South, past 
the headland, the sandy beach goes on and on, and I walk on and on, stopping 
off for a refreshing dip. On my return, I always stop in at the Bar das 
Meninas, a cool restaurant bar located in front of the reef pool with a 
creative seafood menu, breezy cocktails and chilled beers. Maraú is an 
indigenous word meaning the "sun's light at daybreak". Even more spectacular 
though is the light at the rising of the full moon. Here the moon seems nearer 
and larger than it should be, flooding the beach and tide pools in soft light.

• Where to stay: Encanto da Lua <http://www.pousadaencantodalua.com.br>, 
meaning The Moon's Enchantment, is just a short walk from the pools and 
ringside for the rising of the moon (standard doubles from R$ 230,00 (£70) a 
night, including breakfast, dinner and transfers).Kiaroa Resort 
<http://www.kiaroa.com.br> is one of Brazil's leading luxury beach resorts. 

5. Caraiva, Bahia

Steven Chew, contributing editor Conde Nast Traveller

There's an adage with remote Brazilian beaches: first go the hippies, then the 
yachties, then the French ... Caraiva is still at the happy-hippy stage of 
discovery and even then only for a brief period in the summer. No motorised 
transport is possible in Caraiva so the sounds that prevail are the breeze in 
the high almond trees and the exhaling of a dozen mules that pull the little 
carts that are the only alternative to walking. The beach stretches 
uninterrupted for more than a day's walk in either direction - north as far as 
the much-hyped village of Trancoso and south to Corumbau. Golden sands lead 
down to the water where a firm surf pushes relentlessly against the shore and 
provides the soundtrack to the handful of idyllic beach bars. And then, of 
course, there are the goalposts that remind you that you are in Brazil.

• Where to stay:  There are a few simple hotels on the beach and Fazenda 
Caraiva <http://www.brazilianbeachhouse.com> is a short boat ride up the Rio 
Caraiva.

6. Arpoador, Rio de Janeiro

Gavin McOwan, Guardian Travel

At the end of Ipanema when the traffic curves round to Copacabana, pedestrians 
can carry on walking to Arpoador. A continuation of Ipanema beach, Arpoador 
ends with a tall rocky headline, an easy 60m climb, offering stunning views of 
the whole length of Ipanema, Leblon and the famous Dois Irmãos mountain. From 
the pavement wooden steps lead you down to the sandy beach, a favourite with 
surfers, body surfers and local bathers (most tourists stick to Ipanema or 
Copacabana). Arpoador is one of the few beaches which is lit up at night so a 
late night dip is also a possibility. End the day sipping a caipirinha and 
nibbling on a prawn pastel on one of the outdoor tables at the Azul Marinho 
restaurant, the only beachside restaurant in Arpoador and Ipanema, with a 
fantastic ocean view where you can also watch groups of local kids practicing 
capoeira and small bands of musicians.

• Where to stay: Ipanema Penthouse 
<http://www.i-escape.com/minihotel.php?hotel_key=BR021> (three-bedroom flats 
from $250 a night, including maid service).

7. Lopes Mendes, Ilha Grande, Rio state

Nadia Nightingale, Rio resident

Ilha Grande 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2004/nov/20/brazil.guardiansaturdaytravelsection>
 – big island – is home to Lopes Mendes, the beach of your dreams, a sweeping 
3km of the whitest, finest sand that stretches out to a calm, crystal blue 
ocean. With not a building or restaurant in sight, Lopes Mendes is lined with 
palm and almond trees offering only a little shade. Bathers will need to take 
plenty of suntan lotion, snacks and a good book – although there are always a 
couple of drinks sellers peddling chilled beers. Getting there involves a 
three-hour bus journey from Rio to Angra dos Reis then a hop on the ferry to 
Ilha Grande. A scenic 40-minute boat trip takes you to Abraão, the island's 
only town. Once in Abraão take a small taxi-boat to Manges beach, the last boat 
stop before Lopes Mendes. Landing on the beach, walk up over a hill and then 
down through a small forest to the beach. As you walk out of the forest, the 
beach is right in front of you in all its glory.

• Where to stay: Pousada So Natureza <http://www.ilhagrande.org/sonatureza> in 
Abraão has a pool, air conditioning and is extremely friendly (Doubles from R$ 
200,00 (£62) a night including breakfast).

includes breakfast .

8 Praia da Fazenda, São Paulo state

Simon Heyes, Latin American Travel Association

Halfway between two of Latin America's biggest cities, Rio de Janeiro and São 
Paulo, but truly a world apart, lies one of Brazil's great natural jewels, 
where protected, heavily forested coastal mountains drop vertiginously into 
beaches and azure sea. Praia da Fazenda arcs effortlessly across the wide bay 
from the small, traditional fishing village of Picinguaba. Wade across the 
river – catch a flash of kingfisher green among the mangroves – and two miles 
of deserted beach lie ahead. To your right uninterrupted forest and mountains; 
on your left the bay, scattered palm topped islands and fish jumping. Things I 
love about this place: running at dawn you feel like the only person for a 
hundred miles; the cool, delicious natural spring at the far end; the gentle 
rise and shelter that provides a perfect spot for longboard surfing; and 
watching a school of dolphins from a kayak, and once even a whale!

• Where to stay: Pousada Picinguaba <http://www.picinguaba.com>, a charming 
pousada in a beautiful, natural setting (Standard doubles from €122.50 (£108) 
per person a night, incl breakfast and dinner). Further information on 
Picinguaba and Brazil atlata.org <http://www.lata.org>.

9 Bonete, São Paulo state

Ariel Kostman, Metro newspaper, São Paulo

You'll have to walk a fair way to arrive at his beach – but don't think of 
that as a punishment. For me, the path is the best part, as you pass waterfalls 
and walk in the shade of theMata Atlântica 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlantic_Forest>, Brazil's dwindling virgin 
coastal forest. Half an hour before the end of the 15km walk you'll see the 
beach at Bonete: this is what Brazil must have looked like to the Portuguese 
when they first arrived over 500 years ago: just blue sea, golden sand and 
dense green forest. Finally, the beach: a half-mile strip of sand next to a 
river estuary, with good waves for surfing. There's a small community of 
fishermen who offer very simple accommodation, or you can camp (you should stay 
at least two days). To return to Sepituba, on Ilhabela, there are canoes and 
boats (US$30pp) unless you enjoy the walk as much as I do, and decide return on 
foot, too.

• Where to stay: If you want comfort, Canto Bravo 
<http://www.pousadacantobravo.com.br>. Further information: ilhabela.sp.gov.br 
<http://www.ilhabela.sp.gov.br>.

10. Lagoinha do Leste, Florianópolis, Santa Catarina

Caio Capela, Tucano House owner

Florianópolis island 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2005/nov/26/brazil.watersportsholidays.guardiansaturdaytravelsection>
 has over 42 breathtaking beaches. Praia Mole, the most popular in the heart of 
"Floripa" and surrounded by green mountains, is where the young and beautiful 
head. But my favourite is Lagoinha do Leste, a deserted beach on the south of 
the island, an hour's hike away. It is one of the most beautiful beaches in 
Brazil, and backed by Atlantic rainforest, with dunes, sandbanks, a lake and 
rocky coastline. Perfect for camping (no campsite, pitch anywhere) or for a day 
trip. And after the track or boat ride back, you can finish the day eating at 
Arantes, the most popular seafood restaurant in Florianopolis.

• Where to stay: Tucano House Backpackers <http://www.tucanohouse.com> 
(doubles from £12 a night, dorms from £9).
