 Ward Kimball, a pioneering animator at Walt Disney's studios and one of the 
legendary "nine old men" whose work set the standards by which animation is 
judged, has died aged 88, after a life spent creating colourful, eccentric and 
humorous cartoons. An impish character himself, he sent up his fellow animators 
in gag cartoons, and even caricatured Disney himself.
Kimball's skill, sense of timing and irreverence were combined in the 
characters and situations he created, whether it was Jiminy Cricket in 
Pinocchio, the crows in Dumbo, or a madcap tea-party in Alice In Wonderland.

Disney recognised his innovative qualities and gave him responsibility for 
co-directing the first 3D Disney cartoon, Adventures In Music: Melody (1953), 
and Toot, Whistle, Plunk And Boom (1953), the first CinemaScope cartoon, which 
won an Academy Award. Kimball won a second Oscar for It's Tough To Be A Bird 
(1969). In The Story Of Walt Disney, Diane Disney Miller quotes her father as 
saying, "Ward is one man who works for me that I am willing to call a genius."

Outside the world of animation, Kimball's eccentric humour was probably best 
displayed in Art Afterpieces (1964), which had him drawing moustaches and 
blacking out teeth on advertisements, and "improving" the Mona Lisa, Venus and 
Adonis, and other masterpieces.

His love of music led to the formation of the Firehouse Five Plus Two, a 
Dixieland jazz band with Kimball on trombone and fellow "nine old man" Frank 
Thomas on piano. The band played dances at the Disney studio, before graduating 
to nightclubs, television appearances and 12 albums.

The Minneapolis-born Kimball's introduction to Disney came in 1934, when an 
instructor at Santa Barbara school of arts persuaded him to submit his 
portfolio to the studio. At his interview, he asked for an instant decision 
because he had insufficient money to get to Los Angeles a second time. Six 
months later, he got his first solo assignment, animating a 
grasshopper-musician in the Silly Symphony cartoon Woodland Cafe (1937).

Kimball almost quit in 1937 when Disney told him that, because the 
feature-length Snow White And The Seven Dwarfs was running long, the scene he 
had been working on for months was to be cut. The lost soup scene - in which, 
as Snow White and the dwarfs sit down to eat soup, their slurping and clinking 
turns into a song - became legendary among fans; it remains a classic that has 
only ever been seen in pencil animation.

Disney diverted Kimball's frustration with Pinocchio (1940), offering him the 
opportunity to create one of the central characters, Jiminy Cricket, the 
conscience of the marionette who wants to be a real boy. Kimball rejected more 
than a dozen versions before Jiminy emerged. "I ended up with a little man who 
looks like Mr Pickwick, but with no ears, no nose and no hair," he recalled. 
"The audience accepts him as a cricket because the other characters say he is."

Kimball was the animation supervisor on the sequence of Beethoven's Pastoral 
Symphony in Fantasia (1940), and Dumbo (1941), which he later called his 
favourite Disney project because, as long as they kept within budget, the 
animators were given a free hand to let their imaginations run loose. His 
mastery of visual comedy is probably best seen in The Three Caballeros (1945), 
as Donald Duck, José Carioca and Panchito maniacally perform the final title 
number.

He was also involved in Make Mine Music and Peter And The Wolf (both 1946), 
Melody Time (1948), a contemporary Fantasia set to the music of Roy Rogers, the 
Andrews Sisters and others, Cinderella (1950), in which he animated Lucifer the 
cat, Peter Pan (1953), Mary Poppins (1964) and Bedknobs And Broomsticks (1971).

Kimball was among those who helped develop the Tomorrowland section of 
Disney's theme park, and for the Disneyland TV series he directed Man In Space 
(1955), a show that won a complimentary call from President Eisenhower. He 
followed up this success with Man On The Moon (1955) and Mars And Beyond (1957).

His other Disney credits include the script of the live-action fantasy Babes 
In Toyland (1961), and producing and directing 43 episodes of the syndicated 
series The Mouse Factory (1972-73).

After retiring in 1973, Kimball concentrated on his other great interest, 
railways. Back in 1938, he had built the fullsized Grizzly Flats Railroad, with 
a 64,000lb steam locomotive, dating from 1881, which he restored and ran over 
900ft of track in his three-acre backyard in San Gabriel, California. A former 
president of the Train Collectors' Association, in 1992 he donated part of his 
system to the Orange empire railway museum in Perris, California.

In 1978, he was the conductor on a whistle-stop train journey from Los Angeles 
to New York to celebrate Mickey Mouse's 50thbirthday.

He is survived by Betty, his wife of 66 years, two daughters and a son. 

· Ward Kimball, animator, born March 4 1914; died July 8 2002
