
By any measure, journalism is a tough industry to break into. Would-be hacks 
must first face the challenge of unpaid internships, low starting salaries and 
downsized newsrooms.


For journalism students, it’s difficult to know what you’re supposed to be 
doing to get a break, but one thing does seem obvious: the lecturers we pay to 
teach us should be helping us to figure it out.


But are journalism degrees really up to scratch? In 2009, Professor Tim 
Luckhursttold the Association for Journalism Education’s annual conference 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/news/read-all-about-it-element-of-fraud-in-journalism-education/407104.article>
 in London that some journalism courses were a waste of time because they 
“pretend to have a direct vocational outcome”.

And some students complain that courses are too general during the early years 
of study, and restrict their ability to specialise.

Related: Do you need a postgraduate degree in journalism to get ahead? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/27/journalism-postgraduate-degree-is-it-worth-it>

“As each student intends on going into a different line of journalism, I don’t 
feel as if we have as much freedom to experience the modules we want to go into 
as students,” says Alizéy Mirza, who is going into the second year of a 
journalism degree at City University, London.

“I want to go into broadcast journalism, so it would be nice to have the 
option of spending more time in front of a camera and doing practical exercises 
as opposed to exams and written work,” adds Mirza.


Students <http://www.theguardian.com/education/students> often aren’t made 
fully aware of all the options open to them when they leave, and courses can 
focus heavily on news reporting at the expense of long-form, documentary, and 
other forms of journalism.

Alice White, who is now studying an MA in video journalism after completing a 
journalism degree at Bournemouth University, felt the BA didn’t offer many 
options for those wanting to do anything but news reporting. “It would have 
been nice to know more about being a freelancer. Much of the course revolved 
around reporting for news on TV, radio and newspapers. I would have liked to 
have done an in-depth documentary, rather than reporting on the day-to-day.

“I’d like to have learned about how to build relationships with interviewees, 
‘running and gunning’ with a camera, and how to get the best story out of your 
subject,” adds White.

Despite many journalism students’ frustrations with their courses, I’m yet to 
meet one who says their course is horrific, or that they wish they’d done 
something else. Most accept the limits of their course and motivate themselves 
to get the knowledge they need in their own time.


Related: About the Guardian Student Media Awards 2015 
<http://www.theguardian.com/student-media-awards-2015/2015/jul/10/about-the-guardian-student-media-awards-2015>

And some say their university courses are a great way to build real-world 
experience. Laura Harding, a third-year journalism student at the University of 
Winchester, says: “The biggest benefit of our course is that we are doing real 
work that local people can actually read and watch, without it having a 
reputation of ‘student work’.”


Mirza agrees. “We have had to contact journalists on our own for essays and 
interview people on the streets for their opinions on certain topics, which at 
the end of the day, are fundamental skills required of a journalist,” she says.

Julian Calvert, journalism lecturer and assistant head of social sciences, 
media and journalism at Caledonian University, Glasgow, says that if students 
want to get a job in the media, a degree is an excellent route.


“Courses which are accredited by one or more industry bodies can be expected 
to prepare students for the world of work,” he says. “Our degrees in multimedia 
journalism do just that, with excellent employability results. It isn’t 
impossible to get a job in journalism straight out of school, but it’s quite 
rare nowadays.”


For me, ensuring your course provides you with the right skillset is key. 
Repeatedly on work experience, I’ve been told you need practical skills and 
experience if you want to land that elusive first job.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
