
I am in my early 60s, long married. We are not the greatest love match but 
have come this far. We have areas of tension but always back off from saying 
what we really feel. Our sex life, never great, is now non-existent. We don’t 
do much together but rub along and pursue our different interests. We have 
grown-up kids.

The problem is, I’ve fallen in love with another man. We really liked each 
other from the start. He is intelligent, calm, gentle and confident, with a 
refreshing lack of ego. But he is a single parent (I don’t know the history), 
seems to have little money, works long hours and is a lot younger.

I get a thrill out of seeing him in our limited and public interactions, and 
this feeling is getting stronger. We have a drink occasionally, but always in 
company. I would love to spend more time with him and get to know him better, 
but it’s not possible.

He has awakened in me desires I thought beyond me at my age. I don’t believe 
it’s all one way. I’ve had looks from him that suggest warm affection but also 
sexual interest, and I feel a great sexual tension between us. He has made no 
passes and I don’t believe he will as things stand.

I’ve had looks from him that suggest affection but also sexual interest, and I 
feel a great sexual tension between us

I went a few weeks without seeing him recently and calmed down. I told myself 
I had got over him, but when I next saw him my feelings were, if anything, 
stronger. My desires are close to unbearable.

If I tell him how I feel, he may leave the group we’re both in and I might 
never see him again. But if I found he had a similar passion for me, I would 
want to be with him. Assuming he also wanted this and we went ahead, it would 
cause huge hurt and guilt.

Should I tell him how I feel? Am I being an old fool? (I’m young for my age, 
though.) I know the heart most likely to be broken is my own. I feel the need 
to take care of myself, but I can’t talk to anyone I know about it.

It’s a shame you feel you can’t talk to anyone because you might find you 
weren’t alone in feeling like this among your friends. You might get some 
surprises. But I think you are right to be careful because while talking is 
good, it should be with someone you trust utterly, otherwise you make yourself 
vulnerable.

I am going to recommend that you talk to someone professional (
psychotherapy.org.uk <http://www.psychotherapy.org.uk/>) because I think this 
will help to focus – and stabilise – you. It’s very hard to make decisions when 
you are reeling. It doesn’t mean you’ll have to lie on a couch for years: one 
or two sessions may be enough of an outlet.

You sound sensible and that is no bad thing. I wonder how you would feel if 
your husband wrote me such a letter? Relieved or betrayed? (My advice would be 
the same to either of you, by the way.)

Chris Mills, a psychotherapist who specialises in couples and family 
mediation, says: “The extent of your excitement about this new man is in direct 
correlation to what has been missing from your own marriage.”

He thinks you are “burning with all the stuff you have not been able to have 
in your marriage, but this can lead to unrealistic fantasies. You’re 
not imagining doing everyday things with this man [shopping together or setting 
up home]. It is completely sexualised.”

I think fantasies are no bad thing, and many people have them. I wonder if you 
have ever felt like this before, or if these feelings are new to you; or if an 
attraction to a man has never been so intense. The problem with fantasies comes 
when they take over and real life seems unbearably dull as a result.

As Mills explains: “Sexual fantasies should be fun. If instead they start to 
haunt us, we know we’ve got a problem. We don’t stop noticing other people when 
we get married. But whether we [just] enjoy the sexual fantasies or whether 
they become a source of pain/obsession depends on what you’re getting – or not 
getting – from your relationship.”

In other words, the fact that this fantasy has become so fertile and febrile 
is because it is so different from your everyday life.

So all paths that lead to this man, also lead back to your marriage.

“There is a chance that you and your husband could reconnect,” says Mills. “At 
the moment, it sounds as if neither of you knows how to communicate. And 
there’s a danger that if you can’t communicate, you’ll take that deficit with 
you into another relationship.” (After the initial fireworks!)

This man may be your next husband. He may have fantasies about you. He may 
want to act them out. Or he may not. You could be massively brave and ask him, 
but then, perhaps, the fantasy would become too real? What seems less painful: 
doing nothing or saying something? Interestingly, you haven’t said what you 
would actually like to happen.

I think your marriage has been stagnating slowly and you have been able to 
pretend otherwise. Now this man has come along and reminded you of who you are 
and what you are capable of. Whether the “new you” can go back to your old life 
needs careful thought.

Your problems solved

Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
