
How it works
Our group, informally known as the Geriactives, is made up of around 30 
couples who range in age from late 50s to early 80s. We meet every other Monday 
for a five-mile walk in the countryside near Bristol, catching up and chatting 
as we go. We always start and finish at a pub, where we have lunch together 
afterwards. Not everyone turns up for every walk – there is a hardcore of 
around 10 who do, and others turn up occasionally.

Who to walk with
It helps if you already have a group of people loosely connected to each 
other. The Geriactives started out 25 years ago as a keep-fit programme for 
retired staff members of Bristol University. It proved so popular that it has 
grown and grown and now includes people who have no connection to the 
university. Some people join as a couple, others on their own. It's a fantastic 
way to meet new people, so it's ideal for anyone who has lost their partner or 
just moved to the city. You might start your walking group with a band of close 
friends, and as the word spreads new people will join in.

Planning the walk
We all take it in turns to organise a walk. Some people share their favourite 
walks with the group, others pick a new one to try from an Ordnance Survey map, 
or from a website or guide book. Depending on what your priorities are, first 
pick your pub. For a new walk, the organiser will usually do a recce 
beforehand, taking notes on how muddy it is, how steep and how many stiles 
there are, so that the rest of the group can then decide if they're up to it. 
We have an email group that we use to stay in touch with each other.

Getting there
We meet every other Monday at 9.30am at the same car park so everyone can get 
there. We then whittle down to as few cars as possible and drive to the 
location. We're happy for the walk to be anywhere up to 40 minutes away, 
although you might choose to make it closer to home. We love the countryside 
because of the fresh air and views, but a city walking group would be equally 
enjoyable.

Social networking
People have said we ought to be described as a talking group rather than a 
walking group. It has a very, very important social value. We've had people 
with Alzheimer's disease, people who have been widowed, and people with 
Parkinson's. There's room for everyone. Because we have to be free to walk on a 
weekday, we tend to be older, but walking groups are for any age. We go at the 
pace of the slowest, breaking off, regrouping, so that by the end of the walk 
there's no way that you've spent the entire time talking to one particular 
person – and it's the same when we get to the pub.

Over to you: Who do you walk with?

If Susan and Veronica's stories of walking with friends inspire you to set up 
your own walking group, we would love to hear how it goes.

Please share photos and stories of your walks - and tell us about the group: 
Who did you walk with? What did you chat about? Where did you go? We'd also 
love to know why you walk with a group, whether it's a chance to make new 
friends, get fitter, or just for fun.

The best contributions will feature in the March issue of Do Something, the 
Guardian's brand new monthly activities magazine. Please upload hi-res images 
so that we can publish them in print.

To take part, just click on the blue "contribute" button or download the free 
GuardianWitness app for your smartphone.
