
Millions of people are forced to survive during war; hiding from snipers, 
searching for medicine, relying on food aid. Emergency humanitarian assistance 
provides urgent and important relief, but this is not sustainable. Somalia’s 
civil war lasted for more than 20 years. No one anticipated such a long, 
complex conflict – likewise in Syria. Large-scale foreign humanitarian 
assistance over a prolonged period is costly, blocks development and creates 
dependency.

For decades, there has been a clear distinction between humanitarian aid and 
longer-term development. The former surged into the public consciousness 
through the famines in Biafra in the 1960s, Ethiopia in the 1980s and Bosnia in 
the 1990s. In contrast, longer-term development was reserved for stable 
environments which sought to increase socio-economic welfare.

However, this dichotomy is fading. 

Responses to recent crises in Syria, Somalia, Yemen, Mali, Iraq, Libya and 
Afghanistan have substantially transformed development’s modus operandi. As 
states collapsed and civil unrest spread, innovative solutions to reinforce 
social cohesion and welfare have appeared.

Stabilisation programmes are now jump-starting development in the midst of 
conflict by facilitating grants for communities and local governments to 
manage, implement and monitor their own public services. There are challenges, 
of course. Such programmes are highly political and gatekeepers are common. In 
fragile states, illegitimate local governors or councils can sometimes prevent 
access or be nepotistic, which only inflames tension. Extensive conflict 
analyses and finding the right people to work with is difficult, but crucial.

However, the benefits outweigh the challenges. Democracy doesn’t have to wait 
for a central government to be formed and agile teams move quickly to meet 
immediate needs. Most aid organisations only provide a few, limited services 
(food, health or water), but stabilisation programmes work across sectors. 
Democratic community representatives and governments work together – fostering 
social cohesion – to provide for their own people. This ensures real local 
ownership and sustainability. Most stabilisation projects also employ the 
majority of its staff from conflict-affected areas which simulates the local 
economy.

In Central African Republic, local and traditional institutions stepped into 
the void left by the absence of a functioning central government. The outbreak 
of ethnic violence and the surge of militia across the country led to the 
collapse of traditional hierarchical and societal structures. Stabilisation 
programmes are revitalising decentralised administrations to achieve local 
stabilisation and national recovery. This includes developing local legal 
service advisory councils to solve grievances and supporting community radios 
to develop public discussion and debate between communities and local 
governments.

In Somalia, communities are rebuilding roads together with their local 
government, and in Syria local councils are building bakeries to ensure their 
community has continuous access to food. Stabilisation programmes are still 
relatively new so time will tell, but evidence suggests that local 
stabilisation can – and should – assist national recovery.

When should stabilisation initiatives start? How can such programmes work with 
humanitarian aid agencies? How can stabilisation programmes mitigate high risk? 
Join us at theEuropean Union’s Development Days 
<https://eudevdays.eu/sessions/local-stabilisation-national-recovery> this week:

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Adam Smith International 
<http://www.adamsmithinternational.com/>, a sponsor of the Guardian’s Global 
Development Professionals Network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global-development-professionals-network>.

