
We've been thinking for a long time of having a designated day of the week, or 
of the month, as a regular "volunteer day" when anyone who wants can roll up 
and get involved. We've seen it work really well in other community woodlands. 
If you have a regular slot you don't need to contact everyone: people just know 
it's happening and can come along if they've got the time or energy. Over 
months and years you can build up a really strong network of people who rightly 
feel they have a stake in the woodland: "I laid that hedge," they think to 
themselves, or "I planted this stand of oaks."

That said, however, I've been putting off the idea for a while. My resistance 
has been due to the fact that it has always seemed slightly exploitative to me. 
The bottom line is that my wife and I own this place, and that skews the whole 
volunteering thing. Rather than contributing to a noble cause, someone could 
quite understandably think they were free manual labour on "Jones Estates", 
that they were just being offered the chance to come and do our weeding (or 
some such) in return for a bowl of soup. It didn't seem much of a deal to me, 
and it wasn't one I wanted to offer to the wider public.

But over the past 18 months my attitude has changed. In that time, volunteers 
have come informally anyway and they seemed to have loved building a log shed, 
or a tree house, or a turf roof. Whenever I've mentioned my concerns, those 
volunteers have always said that they got much more out of it than we did: that 
they learned new skills, made new friends, were refuelled with great Italian 
food and so on. It seems that there are a lot of people desperate to swing an 
axe, and they don't mind where they do it or on whose behalf. If those people 
not only swing an axe but also glimpse the wider vision for this place and work 
alongside some of our guests, they may hopefully play their part in rebuilding 
lives as well as log sheds.

A volunteer day also started to appeal as a way to keep our project rooted in 
the local community. I love receiving emails from around the world and being 
referred guests from distant parts of the country, but I think everyone here is 
keen to make sure that we're welcoming first and foremost those who come from 
within a few miles of here. And there's plenty of need nearby. The advantage of 
a volunteer day is that it will be, on the whole, a local rather than 
a cosmopolitan affair.

We quickly realised that choosing which day of the week to do it on had 
implications: having a Saturday as our designated volunteer day would attract a 
very different crowd to a midweek one, when obviously most people will either 
be unemployed or retired. That, in part, is why we plumped to have it every 
Wednesday. All we ask is that people let us know they're intending to come so 
we know how much lunch to provide. Hopefully, in years to come we'll have a 
core of volunteers who will want to take part in more ambitious projects that 
are on the horizon: digging the pond, building a woodland sauna or the 
straw-bale chapel, planting the orchard and so on.

But it's not all highfalutin idealism. There's a bit of strategic thinking 
behind the idea as well, inasmuch as we've been rather overwhelmed by people 
wanting to visit recently. Each week 20 or 30 people contact us eager to come 
down and see what's going on. We're grateful for the interest and are always 
reluctant to turn people away, but we're equally loath to down tools every time 
a new arrival turns up and wants to be shown round. If we didn't have a regular 
sort of open day, we could spend our entire time making tea for people and 
sitting round the Aga chit-chatting away. It's much easier now to say: 
"Wednesday is volunteer day – that's when we're open to all comers. Come be a 
part of it." In our experience, most people prefer it that way: most come here 
not because they want a cuppa but because they want to get their hands dirty. 
They want to do something more than see something.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
