
What’s the most impressive thing that you’ve ever made?

I am not a DIY <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/diy> specialist but I 
did amputate the ends of my own fingers with a saw. I lost an inch and a half 
of the fingers and thumb on my left hand to frostbite in the Arctic in 2000, 
after I fell into the sea in the dark. Back home I had to wait five months for 
the final amputations and every time I touched something it was agony. So I got 
out the Black and Decker bench and my wife brought me a cup of tea. The thumb 
took two days but eventually I got rid of all five of the ends and the surgeon 
said I’d done a good job. I have still got the mummified fingers: it’s very 
difficult to throw away something that has been part of you for sixty years or 
so. I keep them in my office drawer in an old Kodak tin.

Who is most likely to change a lightbulb in your house? 

I can change lightbulbs and I can also unblock sinks – so I am an electrician 
and a plumber by definition.

Where do your tools live? 

My tools are in my top drawer, I have an adjustable spanner, a screwdriver, a 
Phillips screwdriver and a pair of scissors. I still have the Black and Decker 
bench too.

What’s your favourite bit of kit? 

My small adjustable spanner is definitely my top item.

What was the last thing you bought from Ikea? 

I make a specific thing about buying UK-made stuff, including furniture.

Bin it or mend it? 

If something’s broken I would automatically reach for the duct tape. And if 
that didn’t work I would try a splint. Most people would turn their noses up 
and scoff if duct tape were included as DIY.




What was your biggest DIY disaster? 

On a long drive, the exhaust pipe came loose, so I duct-taped it to the tow 
bar. When I got home, the exhaust got inextricably entwined with the gate and 
the car was trapped there all night.Interview by Rosanna Greenstreet

Heat: Extreme Adventures at the Hottest Temperatures on Earth by Ranulph 
Fiennes <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/ranulph-fiennes> is out now 
