
Why now? It's truffle season in Piemonte and Alba is the capital of the white 
truffle. The truffle fair and market run at weekends from Sept 30-Nov 5. On Oct 
1 there is the Palio degli Asini, or running of the donkeys, a parody of 
Siena's Palio.

Getting there: Ryanair flies Stansted-Turin, Alba is an hour's drive. 

Where to stay: At Forestiera Conti Roero (0039 0173 466685, Contiroero.com 
<http://www.contiroero.com>) an eight-room hotel just outside Alba at the foot 
of a medieval castle. Doubles from €90.

Where to eat: Pick up a picnic of salami and cheese, oil, bread and fresh 
agnolotti, a Piedmontese stuffed pasta, at the fair. Ristorante Dulcis Vitis 
(Via Rattazzi 7, +0173 364633,Dulcisvitis.it <http://www.dulcisvitis.it>), 
serves regional specialities including gallo al barolo (chicken cooked in 
barolo wine) and tortino di marroni con pera Madernassa al Roero (Roero-style 
chestnut pastry with Madernassa pear).

What to buy: If you don't want to splash out on fungi, bring home a bottle or 
three of Barolo wine and Gianduiotti, chocolate and hazelnut delicacies sold 
all over the region.

Added extras

Going on holiday is supposed to be about switching off. Problem is there's so 
much to think about that by the time you get there you're seriously stressed: 
how many bikinis to take, whether you need to replace those flowery trunks now 
that Blair and Cameron have been spotted in them, who's going to feed the cat 
... One specialist tour operator has come up with a nifty little service to 
save you at least one decision - which books and music to pack. Black Tomato is 
offering to send clients a book to take on holiday and a CD to download to your 
iPod. You just tell them what kind of stuff you're into and they'll post you 
some suitable reading material and music - free of charge - ready for your trip.

Black Tomato aren't the only ones upping the ante when it comes to bespoke 
services. With more of us booking DIY holidays online, specialist operators are 
devising added extras that you won't get with the likes of Expedia, Ryanair or
Laterooms.com <http://www.laterooms.com>. Original Travel has just introduced a 
Q&A service called Ask Ron, designed to answer any pre-holiday queries from the 
best places to hang out in Berlin to summer skiing in Europe.

Meanwhile, Travel Counsellors, a network of travel agents who work from home, 
has launched Suitcase, a concierge service for clients who want to pre-book 
restaurants or shows. As competition from the internet hots up, expect more of 
these added extras. It seems that the days of tour operators just selling 
holidays are almost over.

· Blacktomato.co.uk <http://www.blacktomato.co.uk>; Originaltravel.co.uk/askron
 <http://www.originaltravel.co.uk/askron>; Suitcaseglobal.com 
<http://www.suitcaseglobal.com>.

Thomson goes greener

Hands up who wants a holiday that damages the planet. No one? We want trips 
that are sensitive to the environment and fair to local communities, that is 
taken as read these days. While most independent tour operators cottoned on to 
this trend a while back, the mainstream companies have been a little slower off 
the mark. So, it's cheering to hear that Thomson - the biggest of them all - 
has launched a sustainable tourism section on its website (
Thomson.co.uk/sustainabletourism <http://www.thomson.co.uk/sustainabletourism>
), which provides details about the company's initiatives to support the 
environment and communities. At the end of the year, Thomson plans to flag up 
the most environmentally friendly hotels in its programme with a "Green Medal" 
logo in its brochures and on its website. It's an acknowledgement that green 
tourism isn't just about remote jungle lodges, it's about getting large-scale 
resorts to accept their responsibility to the environment.
