
Shoes are, as many teachers might tell you, one of the battlegrounds in a 
school’s uniform policy. Heel height, colour, whether or not a pupil’s shoe 
could actually be classed as a trainer are all argued over. But research 
suggests schools should do away with shoes altogether. The issue has been 
looked at as part of theLearnometer <http://rubble.heppell.net/learnometer/> 
project, examining the physical conditions of classrooms, including 
temperature, light, sound and CO2. In the project, children surveyed each other 
at other schools in different countries, and one of the things that appealed to 
them, particularly after speaking to children at schools in Scandinavia, is
introducing shoeless classrooms 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/2016/05/23/schoolchildren-with-no-shoes-on-do-better-and-behave-better-in-t/>
.

Stephen Heppell, professor of new media environments at Bournemouth 
University’s Centre for Excellence in Media Practice, who is running the 
project, has observed many shoeless schools now, and has seen the effects, 
including better behaviour. Going shoeless also has a particular impact on 
bullying. “It seems to be difficult to be a bully with your shoes off,” he 
says. “All the places we’ve been where kids have their shoes off, they report 
calmness.”

The researchers had asked children where they read at home. “Ninety-five per 
cent said it was with shoes off, sitting in comfort on a sofa, bed, on the 
floor, on a beanbag.” Making the classroom more comfortable and inviting, with 
clean carpets and no dirty footwear, could encourage reading, he says.

It isn’t just the children who should spend the day in their socks, says 
Heppell, the teachers must too. “You can’t have a room that’s shoeless unless 
everybody is shoeless.”

Whether any of this barefootedness translates into academic progress is 
difficult to say. “There are a lot more variables. These experiments are in 
schools that are improving anyway – they wouldn’t be taking their shoes off if 
they weren’t looking for ways to be better.”

Other teachers sound a similar note of warning. Secondary-school teacher Tom 
Starkey says he is intrigued by the idea but warns against falling for quick 
fixes. “It’s the shoes [that are a problem], or the food, or the colour of the 
uniform. It’s more complicated than that. It’s about socio-economic background, 
what’s going on in the school, teaching approach. Focusing on one thing – such 
as shoes, which is cute – sometimes shifts the focus away from things that are 
more important.”
