
TV and newspapers will bear the brunt of a more than £200m reduction in ad 
spending driven by uncertainty over the financial impact of a potential Brexit 
vote in this week’s European referendum, according to the world’s largest 
advertising group.

GroupM, the media arm of Sir Martin Sorrell’s WPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wppgroup>, has downgraded its forecast of 
UK ad growth for 2016 by £220m between its November and June forecasts, with 
the market only expected to bounce back in the event of a vote to remain in the 
EU.

The latest forecast says that TV and national newspaper print advertising will 
bear almost the entire brunt of jittery advertisers who have chosen to hold 
back on committing marketing budgets until the result of the referendum is 
known.

GroupM has cut TV advertising ad spend from a buoyant 7.1% growth forecast in 
November to just 2.6% for the year.

The delaying of spending on national newspapers is similarly pronounced with 
GroupM’s November forecast of a decline of 6% now altered to a double-digit 
decline of almost 12% this year.

“Softness [in the UK ad market]started to set in around 20 February, when the 
EU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> was 
announced,” said Adam Smith, futures director at GroupM. “Some spend has been 
‘deferred’, with no certainty it will return.”

The spending freeze is exacerbating an already tough trading climate for 
national newspaper publishers who are struggling to cope with advertisers 
pulling print ad budgets and a significant slowing in digital revenue growth.

However, Smith said that the downgrade in total UK ad spend growth this year, 
from 7.2% to 6.3% and a total of £17.3bn, will still see the UK be one of the 
fastest-growing media markets in 2016.

He added that on balance, GroupM thinks there is a good chance that 
advertising budgets will bounce back in the second half of the year – if the UK 
remains in theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

“We still think a degree of post-EU referendum recovery is a likely scenario,” 
said Smith. “A vote to remain in the EU would end uncertainty and be likely to 
yield a moderate ad investment acceleration in the second half of this year.”

Smith said that while Brexit has cast a major shadow over the advertising 
figures, it would be “disingenuous” to apportion all of the downgrade to the 
fear and uncertainty over the vote.

“Wage growth was already slowing, demand for exports was still weakening, tax 
was still rising faster than government spending,” says Smith. “It was to this 
mixture that No 10 saw fit to add ‘Project Fear’ to undermine confidence at 
every opportunity. What we may well be witnessing, therefore, is a cyclical 
wobble made worse by politicians.”

As usual the seemingly inexorable rise of digital advertising is unaffected by 
the almost across-the-board downgrade to other media in the report.

GroupM forecasts that “pure-play” internet advertising – which does not 
include ad spend on publishers’ web sites or TV companies’ digital services – 
will grow by 14.5% this year to £8.8bn. In November GroupM forecast it would 
grow by 13%.
