
It's not often I look to the future. Frankly, I have too much trouble with the 
present for that. But the Feast On The Bridge next Saturday is another matter. 
Assuming that the capital, the Realm of Bo-Jo, isn't swamped by a storm of 
Biblical proportions (not as unfeasible at the time of writing as one might 
hope), then Southwark Bridge will be set with 170 tables, each covered with a 
tablecloth marked with place settings, decorated with pictures and illustrated 
with food stories collected from all over London as part of His Honour The 
Mayor's Thames Festival.

But what is a tablecloth presenting a portrait of London at the trough without 
food? Well, there'll be that, too - on the south side of the bridge will be a 
whole range of stalls providing dishes that anyone can come and buy, then sit 
down at a table and eat to their heart's content. Producers ticking all those 
desirable boxes of local, sustainable and seasonal will be laying out their 
goodies. Pumpkins have a major role to play in this feast - grown by children 
from local primary schools, they will form part of the opening ceremony before 
being cooked into a giant communal pumpkin soup. The shells won't go to waste, 
either - they'll be carved into lanterns, to light the bridge as night falls. 
The Feast On The Bridge is going to be one giant, rolling scoff-in.

And not just scoff-in, either, because to the north of the bridge, says Clare 
Patey, artistic curator of it all, will be pumpkin carving, apple bobbing, hat 
making, seed sharing, fire eating, magic and music (Howard Goodall has composed 
a special grace for the event). It all sounds like a medieval masque, with a 
bit of a medieval knees-up thrown in for good measure.

Patey has a mass of golden-reddish, ringleted hair out of which her face peers 
with a mixture of quizzical curiosity and steely determination. She also has 
very long, elegant hands with which she gestures sparingly and expressively.

And her seriousness of purpose is finely balanced by a sense of fun. 

So we have: "The Feast is all about bringing together thousands of people to 
share food and conversation, and reimagines a traditional harvest celebration 
in the heart of the city."

And we have: "Actually, it's just about bringing people together to eat and 
have a good time."

There's: "I want to address some of the big food issues, such as the link 
between producer and consumer, food miles, obesity, particularly among 
children, and the effects of our grazing culture."

And there's: "In the end, people have to enjoy themselves. Personally, I find 
the informal bits - like the conversations between the kids - are as important 
as the formal parts."

Patey has something of a track record in the area of mass catering. Indeed, 
you might call her the Cecille B DeMille of public eating. She was 
artist-in-residence at Friends Of The Earth, which predisposed her to the 
ethical side of food production. She ran The Museum Of ... for five years, a 
museum without a permanent collection but with a performance space and bar. In 
2003, she organised Feast, a dinner for 400 people using ingredients grown on a 
south London allotment, as part of the London International Festival of 
Theatre. "I enjoy coming up with ideas that fit together," Patey says, rather 
modestly, I think.

Last year, though, she moved up a gear, organising the first Feast On The 
Bridge - 40,000 people came, ate and had a good time. The mind lurches under 
the logistics. Well, mine does, anyway. I mean, just think of all the clearing 
away ... "We do rely on volunteers for a lot of help," Patey says.

And this year? "Heaven knows. We hope to do a lot more."

So there you are: prepare yourself for a feast. And the sun will shine, too. 
Clare Patey said so.
