
Ministers today unveiled updated plans to improve the maths and English skills 
of one million adults.

More than £1bn of government funding will go towards improving adults' basic 
skills to help them get, keep and progress in jobs.

Colleges and other education providers will get support to make learning more 
flexible to meet the needs of adults and employers.

More basic skills courses will be given as part of vocational qualifications 
so that people can, for instance, brush up on their numeracy while learning 
carpentry.

The plans are set out in the government's new Skills for Life: Changing Lives 
strategy <http://www.dius.gov.uk/>.

Sion Simon, the further education minister, said the government's original 
strategy had helped nearly three million people since it was launched in 2001.

He said: "The current economic conditions make it even more crucial that 
people have the numeracy and literacy skills they need for work and for helping 
their families, and that's why we're publishing a refreshed strategy today.

"We are working with providers to make sure our numeracy and literacy courses 
are tailored to what people want and need in their lives, and I particularly 
want to tackle the culture which says that it's OK to be bad at maths."

The Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills will raise awareness of 
workplace literacy and numeracy issues and challenge employers to address them.

Its Get On <http://geton.direct.gov.uk> campaign will be extended, focusing on 
raising demand for numeracy.

Alan Tuckett, the chief executive of the National Institute of Adult 
Continuing Education, said: "The government has achieved a great deal since the 
launch of Skills for Life but no one should be under any illusions about how 
far we have to go to make improvements in numeracy skills commensurate with 
literacy, and to ensure that provision is directed towards those most in need. 
This strategy is a strong commitment which we welcome."

Do you need to brush up your maths skills?

1. Four parcels weigh 1.067 kilograms, 1.6 kilograms, 1.67 kilograms and 1.607 
kilograms. Which is the heaviest parcel?

A: 1.067kg

B: 1.6kg

C: 1.67kg

D: 1.607kg

2. A store is offering mobile phones with 25% off the marked price. How much 
will a phone actually cost if the marked price is £72?

A: £25

B: £47

C: £54

D: £60

3. Which of these would be the cheapest way to buy six items?

A: Original price 26p: buy one, get a second half-price

B: Original price 26p: buy two, get the third free

C: Original price 27p: one third off

D: Original price 28p: 25% off

Answers: 1. C, 2. C, 3. B

If you only got a couple right, you could do with improving your skills on a 
free adult skills maths course.
