
Related: George Stephanopoulos won't moderate GOP debate due to Clinton 
donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/14/george-stephanopoulos-moderator-2016-gop-debate-clinton-foundation-donations>

The ABC anchor George Stephanopoulos on Sunday issued an apology for making 
undisclosed donations to the Clinton Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/14/george-stephanopoulos-moderator-2016-gop-debate-clinton-foundation-donations>
, which this week drew conservative accusations of bias and caused him to 
recuse himself from moderating Republican electoral debates.

“I should have gone the extra mile to avoid even the appearance of a 
conflict,” he said.

Stephanopoulos made three donations totalling $75,000 to the charitable 
Clinton Foundation, which is run by former president Bill Clinton, former 
secretary of state and current Democratic presidential candidate Hillary 
Clinton, and their daughter, Chelsea Clinton. He previously worked as a top 
staffer on Bill Clinton’s 1992 presidential campaign, going on to work at the 
White House before moving into the media.

His donations were first reported by the Washington Free Beacon 
<http://freebeacon.com/politics/abc-news-anchor-george-stephanopoulos-donated-50000-to-clinton-foundation/>
, a conservative website.

“Now I want to address some news you may have seen about me,” the anchor said 
to camera, during his hosting of the talkshow This Week and before a commercial 
break. “Over the last several years, I’ve made substantial donations to dozens 
of charities, including the Clinton Global Foundation [sic].

“Those donations were a matter of public record, but I should have made 
additional disclosures on air when we covered the foundation.

“And I now believe that directing personal donations to that foundation was a 
mistake, even though I made them strictly to support work done to stop the 
spread of Aids, help children and protect the environment in poor countries.

“I should have gone the extra mile to avoid even the appearance of a conflict. 
I apologise to all of you for failing to do that.”

Paul Ryan, a senior House Republican and Mitt Romney’s 2012 vice-presidential 
candidate, was asked on CNN if he thought Stephanopoulos would ask “equally 
fiery” questions of Democrats as he continued to cover the 2016 presidential 
race.

“You’re asking a conservative if a well-known liberal is going to be 
unbiased,” Ryan said.

“I’ve known him a long time. I think he has been far more biased over the left 
side of things in the past. I think the way he picked up in the debates with 
Republicans [in 2012] revealed a bias.

“Look, I’ve got no issues with George, he’s a nice guy, but I think everybody 
has political values. I’ve been on his show many times and I’m used to that. 
But in this situation, he basically revealed that he is who he was and he is 
that person.

“Most conservatives expect this. But I think he probably should have exercised 
better judgment, because he is supposed to at least appear to be objective, and 
this has not helped him to do that.”

Bernie Sanders, the independent senator from Vermont who is running for the 
Democratic presidential nomination, told CNN Stephanopoulos should have made 
his donations public.
