
Words form a time capsule of sentiments within first world war history. Take 
the eloquent rage and sorrow of young British soldier-poets such as Siegfried 
Sassoon and Wilfred Owen (who was killed in action in 1918, aged just 25), or 
Charlotte Mew, whose 1919 poem The Cenotaph is a heart-rending memorial: “Not 
yet will those measureless fields be green again/Where only yesterday the wild 
sweet blood of wonderful youth was shed.”

Scottish poet laureate Jackie Kay cites these iconic writers as a 
long-standing inspiration: “I remember studying Wilfred Owen at school, and 
learning Dulce et Decorum Est off by heart and that phrase: ‘the old lie.’ The 
poets who wrote about the war made you feel their anger,” she says. “It was 
fierce.”


Related: 10 of the best: 14-18 NOW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-art-of-1418-now/2016/may/27/10-of-the-best-14-18-now>

Kay’s own deeply emotive works have regularly drawn on her adopted heritage. 
She returns to these bloodlines for her latest poem, Private Joseph Kay, which 
also takes some inspiration from Sassoon’s Everybody Sang (1919). The poem 
depicts the first world war experience of her grandfather, Joseph Kay, who was 
injured in the second battle of the Somme and was a prisoner of war for a year. 
Its lines summon the gait, sound and even scent of an everyman survivor – “shy 
man, bit withdrawn, shrapnel in his arm” – as well as his comrades lost and his 
rapport with his young son. “I wanted to write about how what he passed down to 
my father was songs,” she explains.

Through the first world war contemporary arts programme 14-18 NOW, Kay teamed 
up with historian Charlotte Czyzyk, at the Imperial War Museum North, to trace 
the details of what her grandfather had endured:

“It was extraordinarily moving to be able to tell my father, now 90, about 
where his father was captured, and the dates of his release,” she recalls. “It 
seemed for my dad that he got some of his dad back. Those tiny details were 
almost like Joseph walking back into the room.


“I was also drawn to the idea of making a film of the poem, and having my son 
Matthew, who makes documentaries, interview his grandfather about his 
great-grandfather. I was keen to express what a family can cherish, what things 
get passed down – stories, songs, myths.”

Private Joseph Kay recently featured in 14-18 NOW’s Fierce Light events – 
co-commissioned with Norfolk & Norwich Festival and Writers’ Centre Norwich – 
which included diverse poetry from the likes of Paul Muldoon and Daljit Nagra. 
To be published in Kay’s next book, Bantam, it evokes this modern writer’s own 
shifting perspectives about war – far from faceless youths marching to battle. 
“It never felt personal before,” she admits. “It’s something to think that the 
history of first world war is the history of one family and then another and 
then another.”

The 14-18 NOW series also includes an experimental take on literary legacy, 
with Mark Anderson’s immersive sound installation, Furious Folly. This is the 
first time text has been integral to Anderson’s work, and he mentions reading 
The Monocled Mutineer (William Allison and John Fairley’s account of first 
world war British army deserter Percy Toplis) as a turning-point.

“My spirits lifted through accounts of resistance to the war,” he says. “I was 
also inspired by the Dada art movement of the era: the way it was a reaction to 
polemic events, and how it used text and performance to create an assault on 
the senses. Dada wasn’t specific to one place; its art was disparate, angry and 
multi-faceted.”


Furious Folly’s title is derived from a quote by Dada co-founder Hans Arp, and 
its narrative includes “a cut-up Dadaist text from snippets of letters to and 
from the war front”. The show also incorporates readings of text by Rosa 
Luxemburg and Bertrand Russell. Even the pyrotechnics that have blasted through 
Anderson’s previous projects are used for percussive sound effect here.


“I wanted to create a sense of fear, that not everything is under control, as 
well as compassion and sadness at the plight of the characters,” says Anderson. 
“The show references war in general, up to the present day – the powerlessness 
you can feel in that situation, and the reasons why people might go into a 
state of shellshock.”


The expressions throughout this series range from deeply personal to 
deliberately brutal, but there is a connecting vein throughout: that historic 
words and sounds can spark powerful new sensations.


Fierce Light Exhibition <http://www.nnfestival.org.uk>, 10-28 May, East 
Gallery, Norwich

Furious Folly is at Oxford Magdalen College Field 
<https://oxfordplayhouse.com/index.aspx>, 17 and 18 June; Sutton Park, 
Birmingham <http://www.birminghamhippodrome.com/calendar/furious-folly/>, 8 and 
9 July; Preston Park, Stockton-on-Tees <http://sirf.co.uk/>, 4 and 5 August
