
The editor-in-chief of the Eurosceptic Daily Mail benefited from at least 
£88,000 in subsidies from theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> for his country houses in Sussex and the 
Scottish highlands in 2014.

Payments from the EU totalling £59,534.85 were made in 2014 for Langwell 
estate, a 20,000-acre stretch of moorland near Ullapool in the Scottish 
Highlands owned byPaul Dacre <http://www.theguardian.com/media/pauldacre>. A 
further £29,118.76 was paid to a P Dacre in respect of a home in Wadhurst, 
Sussex during the year.

The payments were made under the common agricultural policy, one of many EU 
institutions regularly attacked in the pages of the tabloid.

The payments for Langwell, first unearthed by BuzzFeed 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/jimwaterson/paul-dacre-langwell-estate?utm_term=.kkk7qz6XQ#.qkLXNM4bE>
, come on top of almost half a million euros the estate received between 2011 
and 2012 from the funds set up under the CAP.

Governments are only required to list CAP payments covering the most recent 
financial year, however Farmsubsidy.org, which archives the records, lists 
payments totalling €179,267 for the property in 2011, rising to €300,408 the 
following year.

Under today’s exchange rates, Dacre has benefited from at least £460,000 in 
subsidies since 2011.

Langwell was bought by Dacre and wife Kathleen for £2.45m in 2009, according 
to documents from the Scottish land registry. It is run as a sporting estate, 
with accommodation for up to 20 and activities including deer stalking, salmon 
fishing and grouse shooting. The 2014 payment for the estate include £3,000 for 
the “encouragement of tourist activities” and £7,000 in “payments to farmers in 
areas with handicaps”.

Dacre’s house in Wadhurst has been dubbed Dacre Towers and is famed for having 
a mile-long drive.

Dacre is Fleet Street’s longest serving editor after becoming editor of the 
Mail in 1992 and also its highest paid, having taken home £2.4m in 2014. The 
Mail has intensified its anti-EU coverage in the run-up to the referendum on 23 
June. As recently as last month, the paper was criticising David Cameron for 
failing to secure reform of CAP in his negotiations with leaders from other EU 
nations.



A spokesperson for the Langwell estate said: “Both Langwell and Wadhurst are 
working businesses. Langwell is run as a farming, holiday lettings and sporting 
business which makes a not insignificant contribution to the local economy. 
Wadhurst is a working cattle and arable farm.

“The agricultural subsidies you refer to were available to every farmer in 
Britain and, in the case of Scotland, included reimbursements for extensive 
woodland planting schemes (native – not commercial trees) to improve the 
ecology of this wildly beautiful and remote area.

“In their determination to make Langwell economically and environmentally 
sustainable, the owners are spending considerable sums of their own money on 
developing the farm, estate and its buildings. Despite this, the business runs 
at a loss.”
