
My friend and colleague Stephen Eyers, who has died aged 73, was an English 
teacher and adviser of teachers. We met in 1974, on my first day at Vauxhall 
Manor school in Lambeth, southLondon <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, 
one of the best comprehensives in the capital at the time, where he had been 
working since 1972.

Vauxhall Manor’s staff regarded the language and culture of the school’s 
working class, ethnically diverse students as something to value and build 
upon. The English department invited poets into the school, took parties to 
Italy, and ran frequent visits to theatres in London, Oxford and 
Stratford-upon-Avon. Exam results were among the best in London for comparable 
schools and Stephen made a major contribution to these achievements.

Between 1974 and 1979, a group of colleagues teaching a range of subjects at 
the school produced a series of papers documenting our students’ language and 
learning. These were combined in a book entitledBecoming Our Own Experts 
<http://www.becomingourownexperts.org/>, which Stephen and I edited. The book, 
now available online, achieved a certain reputation nationally as an example of 
“action research”: the idea that practitioners could also be theorists of 
learning, rather than mere recipients of theoretical ideas handed down from 
higher education.

From 1984 to 1989, Stephen taught at St Martin-in-the-Fields school for girls, 
also in Lambeth and then, until 1995, worked as a teacher adviser, inspiring 
hundreds of younger colleagues through his understanding of education as a 
partnership between teacher and learner in which, over time, the teacher gains 
as much as the learner.

From 1995 to 2004 Stephen worked in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as an external adviser for Kent, 
Surrey and Sussex. He had no medical training, but knew how to help doctors 
improve their teaching of younger colleagues at the bedside. “More humanity, 
less humiliation,” he used to say.

His last job, from 2004 to 2013, was at Kingston University in London, where 
he helped student teachers enter the profession through a variety of 
alternative routes, including from overseas.

A lifelong socialist, Stephen once gave me a photocopied A4 sheet. Its top 
half was evidence that a student of his had, at the age of 11, failed the 
Schonell reading test. Its bottom half was the citation for the student’s PhD, 
gained 13 years later. Underneath he had written: “Anybody may be capable of 
anything.”

He met his second wife, Theresa Cato, also a teacher, at Vauxhall Manor, and 
they were married in 1995. He is survived by Theresa, by his children, Jake and 
Chloe, from his first marriage, to Jeannie (nee Dickens), which ended in 
divorce, and by his stepson, Paul, and his sister, Joy.
