
The international criminal court’s first war crimes trial for destruction of 
cultural monuments opens this week against a jihadi leaderaccused of 
demolishing ancient mausoleums in Timbuktu 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/sep/30/ahmad-al-faqi-al-mahdi-the-hague-international-criminal-court-mali-timbuktu>
.

Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi is accused of levelling medieval shrines, tombs of Sufi 
saints and a mosque dating back to the 15th century that formed part of the
Unesco <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> world heritage site in the 
northern Malian city.


The decision by the court’s chief prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/fatou-bensouda>, to make obliteration of 
heritage a priority in dealing with the aftermath of Mali’s conflict may prove 
controversial in Africa but is likely to boost the ICC’s international profile.


Since Balkan warlords were charged by the international criminal tribunal for 
the former Yugoslavia with shelling Dubrovnik, wrecking the ancient bridge at 
Mostar and damaging the national library in Sarajevo in the early 1990s, those 
responsible for eradicating historical sites have largely escaped punishment.


Destruction of cultural heritage is not a second-rate crime. It’s part of an 
atrocity to erase a people
Mark Ellis, International Bar Association 
No Taliban or al-Qaida leader was charged with the destruction of 
Afghanistan’s sixth-century Bamiyan Buddhas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/mar/03/afghanistan.lukeharding>, which 
were dynamited in 2001. Khmer Rouge genocide trials did not deal with the 
looting of Cambodia’s Hindu temples. Nor have Islamic State leaders been 
indicted for destroying Assyrian statues from Nineveh or razing Roman ruins in 
Palmyra.

The damage inflicted on Timbuktu, known as “the city of 333 saints”, followed 
the rebellion of al-Qaida-inspired Tuareg militias, armed with weapons from 
Libya, in the central African state in 2012.


Faqi, a local ethnic Tuareg, is said to have been a member of Ansar Dine and 
the head of Hesbah, known as the Manners’ Brigade, which considered the 
mausoleums – built to pay homage to deceased saints – to be blasphemous.


He is accused of directing attacks on 10 ancient mud-brick buildings in June 
2012 and July 2012. One of the desecrated sites was the Sidi Yahya mosque, 
built in 1440 when Timbuktu was a regional centre for learning. It contained 
Prof Sidi Yahya’s mausoleum.


Around 4,000 ancient manuscripts were also lost, stolen or burned during the 
Islamists’ reign of terror. Ansar Dine was pushed out of Timbuktu in 2013 when 
French forces intervened. Faqi was arrested in neighbouring Niger and sent to 
the Netherlands last September.


At his first remand appearance, Faqi said: “I am from the Tuareg tribe. I was 
born about 40 years ago. I am a graduate of the teachers’ institute in Timbuktu 
and I was a civil servant in the education department … beginning in 2011.”

 He told judges that he wished to be addressed in Arabic and referred to by 
his full name. The confirmation-of-charges hearing opening the trial on Tuesday 
1 March will be held in the ICC’s new court in The Hague.

There is growing resentment among African states that the UN-backed ICC has 
concentrated its prosecutions on the continent – a development that is 
partially a consequence of the United States, Russia and most of the Middle 
East failing to join the court. The ruling ANC party in SouthAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has voted to leave the ICC.

Faqi is the first person the ICC has put on trial for the Mali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> conflict. There has been criticism 
that no major figure in the Tuareg uprising has been charged.

 Mark Ellis, chief executive of the International Bar Association, who 
specialises in war crimes cases, said: “Politically, there will be those who 
will question why Bensouda is focusing on ancient sites rather than going after 
rape, torture and murder convictions, but destruction of cultural heritage is 
not a second-rate crime. It’s part of an atrocity to erase a people. I hope it 
will act as a deterrent to similar acts in other countries.”

The Open Society Justice Initiative in New York said there had been a previous 
case brought by the ICC for destroying buildings following the conflict in the 
Congo. Bosco Ntaganda, the former Congolese militia leader, was charged with 
destroying a church and a hospital, along with more serious crimes.

“But this is the first time this has been the main charge against a suspect, 
or when the property destroyed has had global cultural significance,” said 
Jonathan Birchall, of the initiative. “Al-Faqi is also the first member of an 
Islamist armed group to appear before the court.”


Legal authority for monument destruction prosecutions derives from a 1954 
convention written in the aftermath of the second world war.


Although the 1938 Nazi-organised vandalism of Kristallnacht – targeting 
synagogues and Jewish property across Germany – did feature in the Nuremberg 
war crimes trials, none of the defendants were specifically charged with 
cultural destruction.


The convention covers architectural monuments, archaeological sites, works of 
art, manuscripts, books, other cultural objects and scientific collections. It 
has been ratified by more than 125 states.


Welcoming Faqi’s transfer to The Hague last September, the chief prosecutor 
Bensouda said the people of Mali “deserve justice for the attacks against their 
cities, their beliefs and their communities”.

“The charges we have brought against Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi involve most 
serious crimes,” she said. “They are about the destruction of irreplaceable 
historic monuments, and they are about a callous assault on the dignity and 
identity of entire populations, and their religious and historical roots.”

More than 350,00 people were displaced by the conflict. Unesco has already 
rebuilt many of the mausoleums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/timbuktu-marks-recovery-of-mausoleums-after-destruction-in-islamist-takeover>
 that were destroyed in Timbuktu.
