
The dilemma I have become more and more concerned with my parents’ drinking 
habits. I have seen them polish off two bottles of wine at lunch and then more 
at dinner. They do not get “drunk”, just tipsy and loud, but I don’t enjoy 
their company as much when they are like this. It is the dependency that 
bothers me most. I have never once seen them have an alcohol-free day. I know I 
come from a different generation, and maybe this is just how people are in 
their 50s. I love my parents and I want them to be around for at least 20 more 
years. I also want them to be happy. And I don’t think alcohol makes you happy. 
It can be fun, but ultimately I think it is a way to hide from your pain. What 
should I do?

Mariella replies Write to them? After all, you’ve put your case so eloquently, 
making me feel more than a little ashamed myself for my own outmoded 
debaucheries. Truly I’m glugging back a glass of water as I write.

The social mores of each new generation shift substantially and generally for 
the better. I recently read William Boyd’s new novel,Sweet Caress 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323374/s/sweet-caress/>
, exploring the entire 20th century through the lens of a female photographer, 
and found myself gripped by the quantity of cocktails downed and cigarettes 
smoked. How anybody ever lived past 40 is a total mystery when you consider 
those lifestyles on the basis of today’s health advice. Recalling how normal it 
was in my 20s to light up a fag in the bedroom during a phone chat with a pal, 
reach for the pack pre-breakfast or even post-coitally, made me queasy and I 
was positively abstemious compared to Boyd’s Amory.

In the first half of the last century there was no moment that wasn’t ideal 
for a smoke or a whisky and soda – on a plane, post miscarriage, at a 
children’s party, or in the bath. So yes, it could partly be a generational 
divide that’s causing you such angst. Your parents do sound like they’re too 
enthusiastic about wine, but consider for a moment the view from their side of 
the fence.

Once you are in your 50s there are two views you can take – and one of them 
leads directly to life’s conclusion. The question of how to respond to the 
accruing and sobering reminders of our own mortality prompts two diverse 
responses. There is the juicing, jogging, skin-peeling, vitamin-imbibing, 
fasting and mindful brigade all attempting in their many desperate 
kale-guzzling ways to turn back the clock. Then there are contemporaries like 
your parents, living life like a game of dare, punishing their ageing bodies 
and pushing health expectations to the cliff edge, because what else do you do 
in the face of certain demise? We applaud the band on the doomed Titanic for 
keeping the music going as the ocean liner slipped into that icy sea, but when 
a human being elects to adopt a similar Neroesque attitude towards their 
declining years we consider them irresponsible.

We’re all going to die and stringing it out as long as medically possible may 
be in vogue, but is it the only answer? I’m the first to argue that 50 is the 
new 30, but once you’ve retired, discovered how little society values your aged 
contribution and started watching friends die and children get divorced you may 
glean your own insight into what’s propelling them towards the bottle. 
Sometimes reality is simply too painful – the thought of a slow descent into 
oblivion, leaving behind everything and everyone you love too large and dark a 
concept to move closer to with clarity. The easiest option for some is a blurry 
amble to oblivion, instead of raging exhaustingly against the inevitable.

Just as our teenagers need to briefly detest us in order to leave us, so a 
healthy disregard for mortality can assist in preparing for its curtailment. 
What you can’t know until you approach midlife is how precious life suddenly 
appears and how paradoxical the combination of increased wisdom and decreased 
lifespan. Staying on the dancefloor long after the band has stopped playing is 
a way of sticking two fingers up to fate. For others, maintaining optimum 
fitness offers a displacement activity and a last stand against the grim 
reaper. That doesn’t mean I’m unsympathetic to your concerns, but think back to 
when your parents tried to control you. You’ve explained very succinctly to me 
why you’d like your parents to back off the booze – your only hope for change 
is to do likewise with them. There’s one thing most parents find irresistible 
and that’s the concern and approval of their children.

But let me sound one final note of caution. You’ve no real idea what’s bound 
your parents together for so long and their relationship dynamic may sadly be 
forged on mutual substance abuse. If your concerns for their welfare take root 
you may find it’s more than alcohol they end up turning their backs on. 
Instigating fundamental change in others doesn’t always stop where you want it 
to.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
