
Making a change can be challenging at all stages of our lives, whether it’s 
taking your business in a new, more experimental direction, moving house, or 
choosing a new car. How do you know if it’s the right move? Or the right time?

No one knows this better than shoe designer and architect Julian Hakes. He 
studied architecture at Cambridge, moved on to “working in engineering and 
specialising in bridges,” he says, and then started designing shoes much later 
in his career. He is perhaps best known for the Mojito, which was the first 3D 
printed shoe to walk the runway. We talk to him about taking the right risks at 
the right time.

You can evolve a traditional design

Julian’s story is definitely one of twists and turns, and proves that 
sometimes a business can develop in a direction you never anticipated, 
particularly when you take advantage of new technology: “We designed one shoe – 
theMojito <http://www.sarenza.co.uk/julian-hakes> – and it became very 
popular,” he says. “Off the back we launched a footwear brand and our shoes are 
now sold all over the world.”

Don’t stick with one discipline 

You might think that architecture and shoes don’t mix, but they’re similar in 
terms of the route from conception to completion: “It’s to do with the 
architectural thinking process. I’m interested in the performance of materials 
that result in an aesthetic. I didn’t even know I was designing a shoe but soon 
realised we were onto something special.”

By experimenting with his approach, Julian found an entirely new business to 
expand into that came with its own advantages. “Architectural projects have a 
long lead-time, fashion is much shorter. And I need that immediacy as well as 
the long-term things. For me, fashion and footwear is slightly shorter-term 
version of architecture,” he adds.

Setbacks can turn into success

One of the most interesting parts of Julian’s journey is the fact that it was 
a combination of potentially damaging economic circumstances that led to the 
creation of the shoe. “During the recession, we had more creative freedom and 
it wasn’t as frenetic. There was time to think rather than constantly rushing 
to deliver,” he says.

“So we thought, let’s do something for us rather than someone else. Something 
that wasn’t a one-off. Now, our main business is fashion footwear, with a 
little bit of architecture going on. We’ve got offices in Hong Kong, Paris and 
New York.”

Be open to change 

When it came to choosing a company car, Julian did his research. He knew he 
wanted a sustainable economical form of transport, but test drove a number of 
electric cars to find the one for him: “I looked for benefits such as driving 
style and response. And the Kia Soul was the best – they are really quite 
sporty; there’s no delay at all in the acceleration, it’s immediate. For me 
it’s like a mini SUV and it’s really nippy.”

Get the facts

When considering swapping from petrol to an electric car, many people are 
concerned about how far you can get on a charge. There is a need to raise the 
public’s awareness of the advantages and allay such fears. “Range is not an 
issue,” says Julian. “ You can get 100 miles out of a charge in summer. In 
winter, it’ll be 80 miles minimum.” Regenerative braking – where going downhill 
generates more charge from the spinning wheels – adds even more range.

The Kia Soul is not difficult or time consuming to charge either. “What I 
really like about it is that it is designed to charge really quickly. In the 
time it takes to walk inside and grab a coffee, it’s charged.

“It’s an efficient technology – and it changes everything,” he concludes.

Save money where possible

While there are lots of incentives to drive a low-emission car, there are 
still only a handful of businesses who have embraced the technologies in the 
day-to-day running of their operations. “From a business point of view, zero 
emissions make sense. From a social responsibility point of view, 
zero-emissions make sense too,” he says.

It also saves the business money: “The Kia Soul is cheaper to run than we were 
spending in fuel per month, so it’s a no brainer,” he says. “No congestion 
charge in London, no parking costs in Westminster, and no charge to charge.”

Find out more, including the full specifications and charging locations on the 
KIA website <>.


Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
