
The leaders of Britain’s biggest trade unions have issued a plea to 6 million 
members to vote to stay in the EU, warning that leaving would allow a Tory 
government to dismantle hard-won worker rights around parenting, holiday and 
equality.

In a joint intervention, the general secretaries of Unite, Unison, the GMB and 
Usdaw were among 10 trade union leaders warning that the Conservatives would 
“negotiate away our rights” if the UK decides to leave.
Brexit explained: current polling 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=current_polling#>
They argued leaving the EU would pose a great threat to maternity and 
paternity pay and leave, the right to paid leave for holidays and equal 
treatment for full, part-time and agency workers.

Their decision to fight for the UK to remain was not straightforward, as some 
including Unite boss Len McCluskey had hinted last year that theycould back a 
vote to leave 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/15/trade-union-uk-euopean-union-tuc-referendum>
 if David Cameron tried to water down worker rights as part of his EU 
negotiation.

However, in a letter to the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/trade-union-members-should-vote-to-stay-in-the-eu>
, the 10 trade union leaders said they were clear that the social and cultural 
benefits of remaining in the EU far outweigh any advantages of leaving, while 
acknowledging it needs to change and “move away from a path of austerity”.

“Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s the British trade union movement worked 
in solidarity with our European partners and fought hard to secure valuable 
working rights legislation at EU level,” they said. “To this day these rights – 
including maternity and paternity rights, equal treatment for full time, 
part-time and agency workers and the right to paid leave – continue to underpin 
and protect working rights for British people.

“If Britain leaves the EU we are in no doubt these protections would be under 
great threat. Despite words to the contrary from figures like Iain Duncan Smith 
and Michael Gove, the Tories would negotiate our exit and, we believe, would 
negotiate away our rights. We simply do not trust this government if they are 
presented with an unrestricted, unchecked opportunity to attack our current 
working rights.”

Related: Trade union members should vote to stay in the EU | Letter from Len 
McCluskey, Dave Prentis and others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/05/trade-union-members-should-vote-to-stay-in-the-eu>

The Labour leader has ruled out sharing a platform with Tories to make the 
case to stay in. But remain campaigners will stage a cross-party show of 
support today with Harriet Harman, Labour’s former interim leader, joining 
David Cameron, Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, and Natalie Bennett, the Green 
leader, to make the case for EU membership.

Jointly they will accuse the leave campaign of “perpetuating an economic 
con-trick” on voters and challenge Michael Gove and Boris Johnson to outline 
their financial plan for life after Brexit. They will also claim the leave camp 
has tried to model their plan for trading on 23 different countries.

In response, Matthew Elliott, chief executive of Vote Leave, said it was 
“desperate stuff from an increasingly desperate campaign” and a “panicking” No 
10.

A new YouGov poll for ITV’s Good Morning Britain is the latest to suggest 
support for leave has increased. It showed a four-point lead for the Brexit 
camp with 45% of people surveyed, compared with 41% for remain, and 11% 
undecided.

The trade union leaders’ message was echoed by Hilary Benn, shadow foreign 
secretary, who highlighted the claim of Priti Patel, a Conservative employment 
minister campaigning for Brexit, that she would like to “halve the burden of 
the EU social and employment legislation”.

Along with Angela Eagle, the shadow business secretary, will on Monday issue a 
direct challenged to the leave campaign to be more specific about which rights 
they want to scrap. Writing in the Guardian, he said: “It’s time for you to 
come clean: which rights that theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> today guarantees for British workers do 
you want to get rid of if we leave?”

Related: The leave campaign would scrap workers’ rights. It must tell us which 
ones | Hilary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/06/leave-campaign-workers-rights-brexiters-british>

He pointed to some of the protections guaranteed by the EU including the 
minimum of four weeks paid holiday; 11 consecutive hours of rest in any 24-hour 
period; a 20-minute rest break if the working day is longer than six hours; a 
minimum of one day off each week, a working week limited to on average 48 hours 
a week; and limits to night work of an average eight hours in any 24-hour 
period.”

The leave campaign has repeatedly stressed that they would not touch basic 
worker rights, while pointing out that British holiday rights and maternity 
leave are much more generous than the EU minimums.


Last week, Patel said the idea that leaving the EU would undermine employment 
rights was “nonsense” and “one of the biggest myths”. “We have been ahead of 
the curve for decades setting employment rights,” she said.

The interventions from trade unions and senior Labour figures take place amid 
worries within the remain camp that leftwing voters may not turn out to cast 
their ballot to stay because they do not want to be on the same side as Cameron 
or they regard the whole debate as a Tory war. A remain campaign memoleaked to 
the Guardian 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/30/labour-voters-in-the-dark-about-partys-stance-on-brexit-research-says>
 last week suggested only half of Labour voters were clear about the party’s 
position.

John Prescott, the Labour peer and former deputy prime minister, told the 
BBC’s Sunday Politics he was concerned about the dominance of Conservative 
voices. “Where’s Labour? It seems like we’re just enjoying the fight between 
the Tories. We’re not putting across the arguments,” he said.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who has moved from his historic position as 
a Eurosceptic to advocating a vote to remain in the EU, said criticism from 
some Labour figures that he was not campaigning passionately enough was unfair. 
“We’re not giving a blank cheque to the EU. We want aEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> where there is solidarity of 
socialist parties, trade unions, people who want to see a decent society, 
welfare state, NHS, full employment, decent right at work.”

The Labour leader has ruled out sharing a platform with Tories to make the 
case to stay in, but Harriet Harman, the Labour former interim leader, will 
join with Cameron, Tim Farron, the Lib Dem leader, and Natalie Bennett, the 
Green leader, to make the case for remain on Monday.

Jointly, they will accuse the leave campaign of “perpetuating an economic 
con-trick” on voters and challenge Gove and Johnson to outline their financial 
plan for life after Brexit. They will also claim the leave camp has tried to 
model their plan for trading on 23 different countries.

In response, Matthew Elliott, chief executive of Vote Leave, said it was 
“desperate stuff from an increasingly desperate campaign” and a “panicking” No 
10.

The leave camp will hold their own event in the Midlands on Monday with Boris 
Johnson, Michael Gove and Labour MP Gisela Stuart claiming that the EU has been 
waiting to charge the UK another £2.4bn after the referendum to fill a black 
hole in its coffers.

‘The risks of remain are massive ... if we vote to stay the British people 
will be on the hook for even more cash,” Johnson said last night. “It is a 
triple whammy of woe: the eurozone is being strangled by stagnation, 
unemployment and a lack of growth, it could explode at any time and we will be 
forced to bail it out.

“The botched bureaucratic response to the migration crisis means the Eurocrats 
are demanding even more of our money. And now we find that there is a £20bn 
black hole in the EU’s finances.”

Peter Mandelson, the Labour peer and former cabinet minsiter, will also give a 
speech on Monday saying a vote to remain will lay to rest all the “grandiose, 
mellifluous bullshit” from anti-EU campaigners for the forseeable future.



