
A book is a many-splendoured thing. From the bible to Das Kapital, from 
Tolstoy to Salman Rushdie, it can shake and shape the world. A book is not for 
banning, though many oppressors try. A book is not for burning. A book is 
scholarship and toil and belief and honesty. Or then again, it’sCall Me Dave.

And here’s the fascinating thing after a week of grubby non-revelations from 
My Lord Ashcroft and Isabel Oakeshott, his rather too eager helpmate. You don’t 
need to hold any sort of brief forDavid Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to feel that hatchet jobs of 
this ilk, flogged to theDaily Mail for six figures and labelled “Revenge!” at 
the top of page one, are wild, woolly and pretty wonky. The grime just comes 
off as you turn the pages. The slime runs on and on.

Ought it not to be allowed? Perhaps we need an independent book regulatory 
organisation now, just as we need an independent supervisor of bullying charity 
phone callers (the latestMail campaign victory). Perhaps, for starters, the 
grisly details of “Pig-gate” – starring a young David Cameron and a head of 
dead porker – are so horrendous that vulnerable people must be shielded from 
them. Call for an Ofhog, or maybe an Ofswine.

The real problem, though, goes back with a mighty clunk to first principles. 
That pig’s mouth and that “private part” of a future PM’s anatomy… It’s a yarn 
spun by “a distinguished Oxford contemporary” of Cameron’s who is “himself an 
MP”. He told Ashcroft and Oakeshott about it not once, not twice, but three 
times. He said there were photographs of this bizarre ceremony at a Piers 
Gaveston Society initiation. But no one has ever come forward to attest that 
the young Cameron joined this club. No one has provided Ashcroft with those 
pictures. Indeed, no one has provided any hard evidence at all. Repetition has 
to serve as conviction.

Which is simply not good enough. No editor of any paper I know, and nor any 
night lawyer advising him or her, would blithely rubber-stamp this deep-throat 
pig for publication. As Ian Kirby, once political editor of theNews of the World
, writes in theSpectator: “The easy way for a newspaper to publish a scandal 
nowadays is simply to serialise a book, preferably one by a ‘name’, and then 
print whatever they say about somebody you know doesn’t have the time or 
inclination to sue. The reputation of the author, not the newspaper, is on the 
line.”

In this case the semi-demi-author is Michael Ashcroft, who owns the company 
who published it and has enough cash in the bank to keep a hundred libel 
lawyers in claret. Could Cameron sue in such circumstances? Only if he had 
similarly deep pockets and was prepared to resign in order to head for the law 
courts in the Strand. It’s a libel-free zone of cynical operation when you 
think about it. Who cares about two sources, proof, corroboration? Not 
relevant. Who cares about libel horrors? Off the piste. Just load the 
muckspreader and push the red button. Maybe this book was supposed to published 
after Cameron’s May defeat, a kind of stamp on his political grave. But hey, 
who cares that he won after all? Why waste a truckload of silage?

Meanwhile, look narrow-eyed as the Daily Mail sidles to the periphery of the 
action. Not me, guv! it’s thatLord Ashcroft 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-ashcroft> you need to blame. He’s 
really sole proprietor of this pig’s breakfast. His allegations, his sources, 
his money, his hired wordsmith. TheMail is merely the humble conveyor of 
allegations to set Twitter pulsating. After all, it’s a book, sold by 
respectable shops. How can the stories it plonks into open discourse be 
suppressed? Feel the weight, count the pages.

On closer inspection, though, such a defence totters at the first hurdle. The 
decision to publish book extracts in a newspaper is one for the editor of that 
paper, just as the decision to broadcast them for the radio or TV editor 
concerned. The immediate speculation aboutCall Me Dave is whether the mighty 
Dacre of theMail has fallen out with Cameron for good? (Answer: here’s the 
first bitter fruit of Cameron’s announcement that he won’t be standing for 
re-election in 2020: get your favourite candidate into this open house early.) 
But there is, even so, one line that can’t easily be crossed.

Dacre is once and continuing chairman of the Independent Press Standards 
Organisation’s editorial code committee. That doesn’t make him the sinister 
deal-broker behind the arras of Hacked Off legend, but it does mean he has 
special knowledge of the code and its warnings against publishing “inaccurate, 
misleading or distorted information”. Does he, personally, know who the 
“distinguished Oxford contemporary” is? Has he embraced a lower standard of 
proof than would be the case if this were aMail original?

The parcel can’t be passed so insouciantly – especially when, among other 
stories, it includes one headlined “How desperate Dave betrayed Britain’s free 
press”. Desperation comes in many forms to many deadlines, but freedom is a 
concept you can’t bring to book. And pork needs stuffing.
