
I nearly killed a family as I pulled up to Woody Creek, Colorado. The memory 
still brings me out in a sweat. I had driven from Salt Lake City, a journey of 
seven hours, and at the last I’d missed a stop, U-turned, and started driving 
on the wrong side of the road. The SUV coming the other way skidded round me 
and avoided the edge of a ravine by a wheel’s breadth. The young mother driving 
had been righteously furious. It was 1993 and I was 23.

I was driving a 1967 Chevy Impala SuperSport, with a huge V8 engine under its 
long bonnet. This was in some ways a tribute to the gonzo journalistHunter S 
Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/30/hunter-s-thompson-high-times-hangover>
. Over long dark nights on the farm in the Scottish Highlands where I was 
raised, I had devoured his tales from the 1972 presidential campaign, of 
running with the Hell’s Angels, of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas.

He sat at his bar and smoked grass from a human skull

Now I’d come to Hunter’s home town to free myself of his influence, as I’d 
come to understand this was a cliché among wannabe writers. I thought if I met 
him he’d be appalling and in one leap I’d be free. Of course, by nearly killing 
the mother with my whale-like car, I was still the cliché.

I haunted the Woody Creek Tavern, his famous hangout, and got to know the 
bartender by playing backgammon with her for money. And then, a few nights 
later there he was, in the corner, looking likeRalph Steadman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/29/ralph-steadman-hunter-s-thompson-gonzo-film>
’s cartoon version of himself, drinking a huge tumbler of booze and having his 
dinner.

I was introduced and, God help me, probably offered him the greetings of the 
people of Scotland. We got on. He liked that I was drifting. He told me to 
follow him back up to Owl Farm, his home, and we set up with more drinks in the 
kitchen. He sat at his bar behind a typewriter and smoked grass from a human 
skull.

It was a long night. He told stories, and read from unfinished manuscripts, 
including the then-unpublished novelThe Rum Diary. And then, as dawn broke on 
the snow outside, he’d had enough. By this stage he was nursing a shotgun on 
his lap. He turned to his then-girlfriend Nicole and said: “This guy’s been in 
town for some time checking me out – maybe we ought to shoot him in the head.” 
I left.

I knew then, as I know now, that I got the HST show. If he was bored and the 
fan wasn’t too obnoxious, he’d put on an entertainment – it kept him from 
having to write. Whatever. I left the mountains with my admiration undimmed.
