
It's a week after the wedding but I'm still wearing my wedding hair. It needs 
a wash but once it's back to frizzy normality I worry that I will be too. 
Already nostalgic, we keep everything from our wedding day – even the half-used 
colouring books given to the children. My bridal bouquet of ivory roses is 
browning forlornly in a plastic tub of water.

But another day, another celebration – this time Tilly's birthday. Anxious 
that her birthday's not an afterthought, I run around the day before our 
wedding, ordering her favourite cake from the local over-priced French 
patisserie and shop frantically for presents. J and I even wrap them up in time.

I have the day off work so I can pick her up from school. Then because I worry 
that as J is working late and a birthday tea with just her sister Lydia, my 
mother and me won't be exciting enough, I get her to invite four friends.

Later that evening, presents unwrapped and expensive chocolate mousse cake 
eaten – Tilly, who has been terrifically grateful all day, says quietly, "It 
doesn't feel like my birthday." And before I fly into a rage ("After all I've 
done, running myself ragged etc, etc) I remember that it's her first year at 
secondary school and birthdays do feel different now. No amount of shopping or 
planning can stop that.

But I wonder if having baby Flora is making me less conscious of my other 
children. I'm so busy crawling after her as soon as I get home, that Tilly and 
Lydia are sometimes in my peripheral vision. "How was your day?" I ask, but not 
necessarily when I can see them. Their answers are sometimes shouted down the 
stairs. And then there's my son Sam, who's 22, on whom I'm meant to keep an 
eye, which is hard because he has turned night into day. He's playing online 
poker all night and sleeping all day – on the rare occasions I catch him he'll 
have a detailed story about how he nearly won a tournament. He feels like sand 
and I can't get hold of him.

Any details on how my oldest daughter, Maddy, is doing at university is now a 
thing of the past. In her first year away, she made me feel like a good mum 
because she phoned most days. Not for long chats – the call was often made on 
her way out for the evening – but I heard about the clubs she was going to and 
the essays she was writing. Days go by this term and we haven't spoken. 
Sometimes there's not even a text. It feels as if she's really gone.

So if she doesn't need me, does that make me an even better mother than I was 
last term? I even forget that she's arranged to go away with friends at the end 
of term, so I won't even see her before the middle of December. Worse, when I 
call her (selfishly heavy-hearted) to wish her well the night before she 
leaves, she tells me they're going skiing by coach. I'm overwhelmed by fears 
about sleep-deprived drivers, snowy conditions and crashes. I know she is an 
autonomous adult, and, goodness, I want her to be, but I can't help myself. 
"Sit in the middle of the coach," I say, with no evidence that this is safer 
than anywhere else. "Be careful. Give me a ring when you get there."

"But I'm not sure my phone works in France," she says.

"Well, please call me or I'll worry."

"Worry about what?"

But I don't want to make her worry about dying in a horrible crash, so I say, 
"Well, you know I worry about anything," thereby making me the last parent 
anyone would want to phone. A day later, she calls. "I'm ringing to reassure 
you and to say I'm OK," she says .

"That's so kind of you," I say. "Are you nearly there yet?"

"No," she says, clearly not understanding my anxieties. "We're in Kent."
