
Actually, what is amazing is being able to make a contribution, because Granny 
truly is this incredible role model for each and every one of us, so it is just 
a huge honour to be able to celebrate what a really amazing person she is, for 
the entire Commonwealth.

For all of us in the younger generation, she is basically our inspiration, so 
we want to play our part as a family by supporting her on her 90th birthday, 
which is such an achievement when you think about it. None of us would dream of 
going on holiday until after it is over. Present-wise, I will make her 
favourite rice crispy cakes from a very special recipe.

And Granny always finds time in her busy life to say thank you – she is hugely 
thoughtful like that. That’s why we all want to thank her back by supporting 
her in her work. For example, I like to support amazing British fashion 
by wearing it if they give it to me. These shoes are British fashion; 
so is this hat. The pearls were given to my great-great-great grandmother by 
the Kaiser in 1870, which is incredible. Granny gave them to me when 
I graduated – joint honours in skipping and rice crispy cakes.

I’d love to work in the field of rice crispy cakes, but it would have to fit 
around all my other commitments. Such as, I go on holiday with Granny whenever 
I am not already on holiday. We are quite a normal family in that respect, but 
of course I am keen to have a career; that is why I gave up work before I 
started, because I wanted to explore roles where I could really make a 
difference. Such as, I hope to help out in a Commonwealth playgroup one morning 
– anywhere in Africa would be amazing.

Related: Modern tribes: the Twitter quitter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/09/twitter-quitter-modern-tribes>

But right now we are all practising for her pageant, and all I can tell you is 
it involves a lot of sitting down and standing up. I’m sure the press will have 
a go if we get it wrong, but if I know I’ve truly made a difference, that’s 
good enough for me.
