
Theory Of Humour: Food 

Last week we developed a Theory Of Funny regarding animals. Let's continue 
this important work by asking: which, if any, foods are funny?

Pies are not funny, although we think they are because we associate them with 
the "pie-in-the-face" gag. But when not being thrust into someone's face, pies 
are not funny. They are actually a bit snobbish, fancying themselves superior 
to their oaf-like cousins the cakes, who are essentially fat but lovable pies. 
Pies are just cakes who went to college. Cakes are working-class pies. Pies are 
neurotic worry-warts. Cakes take life as it comes. The animal corollary of the 
cake is the cow. The animal corollary of the pie is the sly fox.

A cake, though lovable, is not intrinsically funny. Unless it's a talking 
cake, wearing glasses, slowly melting in the hot sun, and as it melts it keeps 
up a steady stream of optimistic banter: "No, honestly, I'm doing this on 
purpose. Not hot at all! Doesn't my icing look noble?" Finally, the cake's just 
a runny blob. But it is in denial, and keeps talking. Then a horse comes up, 
eats the cake, and the cake screams. Not all that funny - except the horse is 
wearing a top hat. So, actually, it is funny. Not for the cake. But funny for 
you and me.

A cake is also funny if it's a wedding cake and the little couple on it come 
alive and have sex on top of the cake, and the cake looks up at the fornicating 
couple through its big, oversized glasses and gets a shocked look on its face, 
as in: "I can't believe you guys are doing that right on my head." The little 
groom, still doing it, reaches down, takes a big fingerful of icing and eats 
it. At this, the cake bursts into tears.

Funny.

Kumquat? Funny. Though I don't know what it is.

Pork snouts? Bacon? Not funny. Unless the bacon/pork snout is in a tuxedo. 
Plus, does anybody really eat pork snouts? One can only hope not. Hence, they 
are not food, so do not belong in this essay. Slink away, pork snouts, you do 
not interest us. Yes: you. Out, out. Although you do look nice in that tuxedo. 
Nice try. Green is a good colour for you.

Although, obviously, funny is subjective. I can't tell you which foods are 
funny. However - candy? No. Steak? No. Carrots? Yes. Tripe? Of course. 
Spaghetti? If someone dumps a bowl of it on a bald guy's head. Onions? 
Sometimes. Oranges, apples, capers, lentils? No, no, yes, yes. Lasagne? Yes, if 
a person on a diet is served a big fattening lasagne by someone he desperately 
wants to please (his mother-in-law, his chef lover) and then he looks at the 
camera and makes a sad face.

This is an example of pathos, which we'll discuss next week.
