
It’s time to put things in pots, to sow seeds and pot on, to plant up 
containers and give old friends a fresh start, but before all of those things 
we need to talk pots.

A good plastic pot is a grand thing. They can be reused endlessly, and unlike 
terracotta they won’t wick the soil and cause the plant to dry out. But 
everyone I know has too many. Be ruthless: recycle any that are broken, cheap 
or don’t stack properly. You can often recycle them at your local garden centre 
(trypottoproduct.co.uk <http://www.pottoproduct.co.uk>).

Related: Growing your own fruit and veg with Alys Fowler 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2015/dec/14/growing-your-own-fruit-and-veg-with-alys-fowler>

Next, vow never to accumulate more and buy pots that are biodegradable so that 
when their time is up, you can just compost them.

Recycle household containers into temporary pots by punching some holes in the 
base. Plastic takeaway trays are my favourite for seedlings because they fit so 
well on the windowsill. Terracotta pots are a fine, handsome choice, but they 
work only for larger plants. Small terracotta pots, however pretty, dry out 
fast: for seedlings and young plants, a sunny day in a dry pot can mean the end.

A plant squished into a pot that is too small is another crime. You wouldn’t 
keep a child in shoes too small and you should think of plants in the same way. 
Quick-growing plants such as vegetables, annuals and biennials need to be 
potted up as they grow. If roots come out of the bottom holes, it’s time to 
move up a pot size. A general rule is not to over-pot too quickly: jumping from 
a 9cm diameter pot to a five-litre is often too much because the spare soil 
slumps into a wet, cold space. Again think of a toddler; they may grow to have 
size eight feet, but you can’t save money by expecting them to wear them from 
the start.

A plant’s ability to withstand drought (aka a neglectful weekend when no one 
waters), frost, pests and diseases are all determined by the health of the 
roots. Thus the bigger the pot you offer for the long term the better your 
plant will grow – especially for vegetables. Two litres is not big enough for 
most vegetables; perhaps windowsill chillies, but that is it. Five litres is OK 
for a single lettuce or a small bunch of spring onions, but even a tomato will 
struggle in that.

Related: Alys Fowler: the trick to growing tricky vegetables 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/13/grow-your-own-tricky-vegetables-alys-fowler>

The minimum depth is around 15cm for vegetables, but that works only if the 
plant can spread its roots laterally. Courgettes, potatoes, tomatoes, 
cucumbers, swiss chard, carrots and peppers need a 10-litre pot for a single 
plant (or maybe four carrots). If you can go bigger, do. It means less watering 
and feeding. Roots forced to grow near the surface have to fight temperature 
fluctuations and often dry out and die. If plants can get their roots down it 
means less work for you. For that matter, mulching with bark, grit or slate 
will help keep the surface roots cooler and retain moisture in hot weather.
