
The proportion of A-level candidates gaining the highest grades of A* and A 
fell for the fourth year in a row, while the overall pass rate reversed last 
year’s trend with a slight rise.

A or A* grades were awarded to 25.9% of A-level papers, compared with 26% the 
year before, while the total number of A*-E grades reversed 2014’s fall with a 
0.1 percentage point uptick, to 98.1%.

The share of entrants awarded A and A* grades has now declined by more than a 
full percentage point since 2011, when 27% were awarded the top grades, showing 
the impact of the government’s policy of fixing A-level outcomes to the 
cohort’s GCSE results two years previously.

Related: A-level results day 2015: the latest news, analysis and reaction 
– live 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/live/2015/aug/13/a-level-results-day-the-latest-news-analysis-and-reaction-live>

The fall in papers awarded the top A* and A grades was particularly marked in 
science subjects, including biology, as well as in English and mathematics.
a-level pass rates 
<http://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/08/a-c-passrate/giv-30080yl14dFuStHF6/>
History, which again gained in popularity among students, suffered the 
steepest fall of the main subjects, dipping from 25.3% gaining the two top 
grades to 24.2% this year. Economics also dropped by a full percentage point, 
from 31.6% to 30.6%.

“The overriding message from this year’s figures is one of stability. There 
have been no significant changes to the system and the entries followed 
expected patterns,” said Michael Turner, director general of the Joint Council 
on Qualifications, which collates the results from the awarding organisations 
for students from England, Wales and Northern Ireland.

The minister for universities, Jo Johnson, said the results suggested more 
students would be going to university later this year, including a record level 
from disadvantaged backgrounds.

“This is great news and shows that by lifting the cap on student numbers, we 
are helping more people than ever benefit from higher education,” Johnson said.

The number of entries was up compared with 2014, despite a fall in the 
proportion of 17 and 18-year-olds in the population. Geography saw the biggest 
gain in entrants, while there was steep fall in takers for the much maligned 
General Studies, as students appeared to have switched to more conventional 
subjects and the likes of computing.

Related: Clearing 2015: what to say on the phone on results day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/13/a-levels-day-what-to-say-on-the-phone-during-clearing>

While results in England were almost identical to the national picture, 
results in Wales suffered a further setback as the country digests a series of 
educational reforms. The proportion passing A-levels fell, with declines across 
the grades from A to E.


The proportion of entries awarded the top grades of A or A* continues a 
decline seen since 2011. The fall has been attributed to more female candidates 
taking fewer subjects that university admissions tutors perceive to be less 
rigorous. Traditional subjects - known as facilitating subjects - are preferred 
by the most selective universities. This trend has erased the previous 
advantage in females achieving top grades.

In 2014, the A-level pass rate – A* to E grades – was down by 0.1 percentage 
point. It was the first time the pass rate had declined, although government 
statisticians later said the rate had remained “fairly stable” since 2010.


Chris Keates, general secretary of the NASUWT teachers union, said teachers 
and pupils across the UK should be congratulated “without reservation” for what 
they had achieved.

“Our young people are working hard under tremendous pressure. Despite poorly 
planned reforms, constant criticism, cuts to pay and a rising tide of 
bureaucracy and workload, teachers are continuing to deliver the best for 
pupils,” Keates said.

Universities are vigorously competing to attract students, following the 
government’s move to abolish the cap on undergraduate numbers that limited 
recruitment.

With universities free to recruit more students and the £9,000 in tuition fee 
income they each bring, there has been an upsurge in institutions making 
unconditional offers to lock in applicants before receiving their results.

More universities, including those in the Russell Group of leading research 
institutions, are also offering places through the Ucas clearing process for 
admissions, with some hoping to attract students determined to trade up after 
receiving better than expected grades.

“With the cap on student numbers lifted, those beginning university this year 
hold the cards when it comes to securing their university of choice, with the 
broadest ever range of options on offer,” said Prof Trevor McMillan, 
vice-chancellor of Keele University.

“On A-level results day, while many students will already have offers that 
they’re able to take up, the clearing process no longer has a stigma attached 
and should be viewed positively.”

Universities UK, which represents the majority of British universities, said 
more undergraduate places were available than ever before, despite the number 
of applications also rising.

Although secondary free schools have yet to see their pupils reach the sixth 
form, the government’s flagship education policy received another boost from 
the London Academy of Excellence, a sixth-form free school near the 2012 
Olympic stadium in east London.

Related: I failed all of my A-levels. But it turned out that it wasn’t the end 
| Anne Perkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/13/failed-all-a-levels-wasnt-end>

The school said that so far 80 of its pupils had gained places at Russell 
Group universities, compared with 68 in its first year, and that more than 
seven out of 10 entrants received grades between A* and B.

There were outstanding results from some of England’s leading independent 
schools, including Magdalen College school in Oxford, where 11 pupils each 
achieved four A* or above, with 29 of its 135 sixth formers winning places to 
study at Oxford or Cambridge.

“Such results are the culmination of excellent teaching, hard work and 
sensitive support over many months,” said Tim Hands, Magdalen’s headteacher, 
who next year will become head of Winchester college.

The headteacher of Brighton college, Richard Cairns, said his school had 
produced incredible results, after the independent school announced the best 
ever performance by a co-educational school in England. More than 98% of its 
entrants gained grades between A* and B, and none achieved lower than C.

One pupil, Majid Mohamed, gained three A* grades and an A, and follows his 
elder brothers Omar and Abeed in going from Brighton college to Cambridge 
University.
