
We've got a chronic shortage of shelters here and have many more people 
wanting to come than we can accommodate. I mention the problem to Vicki Purple, 
a friend from Glastonbury who seems to know everyone in that weird and 
wonderful town, and she immediately comes up with a solution. "You need to talk 
to Morag," she says. Morag has a structure that's a cross between Bag End and a 
yurt and she doesn't need it any more. It has a huge circular wooden door that 
forms the entrance to a space almost 6m in diameter. It sounds perfect. "The 
only trouble is," says Vicki, "that she doesn't usually answer her phone."

Eventually we get hold of Morag, who tells us to meet her next Saturday night. 
We'll need to hire a van, she says, as the wooden poles are 15ft long. So the 
following Saturday, the Busker and I end up driving a large van around 
Glastonbury, trying to find a pub where Morag is hanging out. The town is a 
pretty far-out place. Where else can you find shops called Portal for the 
Immortal or The Psychic Piglet? On one shop counter we spot a sticker saying: 
"God wants spiritual fruits, not religious nuts."

But while the "sacred isle" is unorthodox, it's also full of idealism, and 
"Morag of the Marsh" turns out to be an incredible person: a beautiful 
dreadlocked folk singer and storyteller. She says she likes the sound of what 
we're doing and doesn't want anything up front for the shelter. She generously 
says we can put it up, live in it for a while and then let her have what we 
think it's worth in due course.

So we follow her little car out of the town and on to the dark, bumpy roads of 
the Somerset Levels. It's a freezing night with a full moon and it feels as if 
we're being led up a very long garden path. Eventually we come to a yard with 
two dozen caravans and makeshift homes scattered around the place. We load the 
poles, crown, door and canvas into the van and get a quick lesson on how to put 
it up. "There's a hole for a flue in the canvas so get hold of Gas-bottle Jeff 
if you want a woodburner," she advises.

The next day is warm and sunny and we begin putting it up. Four of us slowly 
bolt the big circular door together and fit the poles into the oblique holes in 
the crown. We wrestle the canvas over the whole thing and put the transparent 
window over the central space. We begin to peg it down and realise we're half a 
dozen pegs short.

The Busker and I axe out the extra pegs from some ash that was kicking around 
the workshop and bash them into place. We'll need to do some fine tuning as the 
canvas still sags slightly and the door doesn't shut perfectly, but we've got 
an incredible new shelter. It's just in time, as a guest is arriving tomorrow 
to stay for a week. Before then we'll need to make it cosy: lay down 
a groundsheet and some rugs, put in a sofa bed and some lanterns.

The empty shelter reminds me of festivals and camping adventures of years gone 
by. It smells of warm grass and woodsmoke. It exudes something of the 
unexpected, as if it's used to unusual characters, to wayfarers and wanderers. 
As accommodation goes, it's pretty basic, but that's what people are usually 
yearning for when they come here: they want to be close to the earth and shrug 
off all the daft sophistication of modern life. That's why one of my favourite 
books, published in 1973 and so large it never fits on any bookshelf, is Lloyd 
Kahn'sShelter: the simplicity of the barns, sheds, yurts and houseboats, built 
by amateur hands to suit circumstance and climate. They are, unlike dire modern 
housing, full of soul. And what really interests us here is how humans, as much 
as building materials, provide that metaphorical awning: how, in the words of 
that famous Irish proverb, "people live in the shelter of each other".

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk 
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
