
Here’s a foolproof method for triggering a futile, frustrating argument with 
your partner, best friend, parent, child – anyone, really. First, make an 
observation that’s factually correct, but implies a critical judgment. (Upon 
returning home in the evening: “Wow, it’s pretty untidy in here.”) The other 
person will react angrily to the implied criticism. (“For God’s sake, I’ve been 
at work all day, too, you know!”) Next, defend your initial statement 
vigorously, but focus only on the surface-level meaning. (“I’m just stating a 
fact. Surely you’re notdenying it’s untidy?”) Congratulations: you’ve 
established a textbook case of cross-purposes, in which both parties are right 
in different ways – yes, it’s untidy; no, that’s not all you meant when you 
said so – thereby all but guaranteeing several hours of increasingly petty 
sniping, until sleep descends, or a more fulfilling alternative presents 
itself, such as finally cleaning the grout between the bathroom tiles.

I don’t really suggest doing this deliberately, of course – but you may well 
find yourself caught up in such rows anyway. To grasp why, ignore the countless 
self-help books on communication in relationships and turn instead to an old, 
rather technical work,How To Do Things With Words, by the philosopher JL Austin 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/350686/>. Austin’s 
mission is to demolish what he calls the “descriptive fallacy” – the idea that 
all language does is describe the world. In fact, it does all sorts of other 
things, too. When I say, “I’d like another glass of wine”, I’m not merely 
telling the waiter about my desires, in case he’s interested; I’m politely 
instructing him to fetch one. Likewise, “It’s untidy in here” may describe the 
situation accurately. But my intention – the “illocutionary force”, in Austin’s 
jargon – is to try to make you feel bad, or get you to tidy up. On one hand, 
there’s what the sentence means; on the other, there’s what you mean by saying 
it.

This isn’t rocket science, yet it sometimes seems as if half of all arguments 
result from people forgetting the distinction, or trying to blur it. This is 
nowhere truer than in the more outraged crevices of the internet: read any 
comment thread beneath an article on the US anti-racism campaignBlack Lives 
Matter <http://blacklivesmatter.com/>, for example, and you’ll find someone 
countering with “all lives matter”; then someone saying that’s racist; then 
someone else saying it can’t be, because all lives do matter… “All lives 
matter” is a classic case of muddling the levels. The descriptive content isn’t 
racist, but the illocutionary force – the meaning of saying it – may well be. 
So both sides argue past each other, interminably, each convinced of their 
rightness.

Related: Gratitude: yes please or no thanks? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/12/gratitude-narcissistic-self-improvement-oliver-burkeman>

Remembering this distinction won’t magically end hostilities, not least 
because the confusion is often deliberate. (The “all lives matter” crowd know 
exactly what they’re playing at, I suspect: they get to be racist, but with an 
alibi.) Still, it’s worth bearing in mind, if only to avoid getting drawn into 
long fights you’ll never win. There’s never a good reason to argue at 
cross-purposes, unless your purpose is to make someone cross.

• oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
