
The preparations for our wedding are going well. Or at least going somewhere. 
But our caterer is unimpressed. "You've got a lot of thinking through to do," 
she says. I'm not sure how much thinking through is needed to choose four out 
of six salads and whether to have poached salmon or beef, but I look suitably 
concerned. "Go home and make some decisions," she says.

That evening we take a break from making decisions and phone some friends to 
invite them.

There's a mixed response.

"I've waited so many years for you to get married," says one. "I feel like 
crying."

"That date rings a bell," says another. "I think we've got something else on."

"Treat it like an invitation to a funeral," I say firmly. "Attendance is not 
negotiable."

For the ceremony, we book the church down our road, which is what J wants. 
It's high Anglican, which in my ungodly ignorance I thought would be rather 
strict about who it married. Apparently not.

"I'm rather embarrassed about walking down the aisle of a church with five 
children," I tell the priest. In our pre-wedding interview we've already 
established that these children are from two different men.

"It won't be embarrassing," he says. "Because it's nobody else's business."

With the spiritual side covered, it's time to worry about what to wear. My 
eldest daughter, who's at university, keeps phoning to check up on me.

"What colour are you going to wear?" she asks.

I hesitate.

"That's it, I'm coming home."

"It'll be something that buttons up down the front so I can feed Flora," I say.

"Please, Mum," she says. "Not on your wedding day."

An old friend phones up to check that I'm making the arrangements and not just 
inviting people. I run through the details of the ceremony and reception rather 
convincingly.

"And dress-wise?" she asks.

"Oh, it's not a formal wedding," I say cheerfully. "Wear whatever you want."

"Duh. I meant your dress," she says.While I'm out with Tilly and Lydia buying 
school shoes because the ones I spent a fortune on six weeks ago are already 
splitting at the soles, I see a cream wedding-style dress. I find one in a size 
I used to be and manoeuvre Flora in her buggy into the changing room. And – joy 
of joy – it fits. Who cares what it looks like, because I can get into it. 
Neither Tilly nor Lydia share my delight.

"Nah," says Tilly, "your tummy looks huge in it."

"We'll, I've had five children," I reply defensively. "And no time for 
abdominal crunches."

"But that mother in the film Cheaper by the Dozen doesn't have a big tummy," 
says Lydia.

B ut I can't tell if she's serious. I don't buy the dress, though, which is a 
shame because not only could I get into it but it was also within our wedding 
budget. A budget already threatened by broken household appliances. First the 
oven blew up, yesterday the washing machine stopped. "We can do without a 
photographer," I suggest, in the light of Tilly's comment about my tummy.

But when I tell that to a girlfriend of mine, she says I must have pictures. 
Her biggest regret was not having a video of her wedding day. "My daughters 
would have loved to have seen it," she says.

"Which is why I can save money here," I say. "Because our children will be 
very much at our wedding."
