
I am an obsessive collector of vegetable gardening books. I have been since I 
was eight years old. Yet there is something I find curious about all of them. 
Almost without fail, page after page is dedicated to the cultivation of 
spinach, while a few chapters later similar space is dedicated to the 
eradication of dandelions. As a botanist I can’t help but think: what if they 
were the other way round? What makes one plant a weed and another a prized 
edible worth so much time and effort?

Despite being cast as a horticultural villain, dandelions are actually one of 
the oldest crops, with fresh, tender leaves. They are a popular salad green, 
from France and Italy to China and India. With good reason, too, as the vegetal 
bitterness is virtually identical to the flavour of other leafy crops, like 
chicory (to which it is related). Nutritionally it doesn’t fare badly either, 
having twice the vitamin A of spinach per serving (more than your daily dose in 
each handful) and more than double the vitamin C, not to mention a huge helping 
of more than five times your recommended daily intake of vitamin K.

Spinach is not only a runner-up in the vitamin stakes, it also is 
comparatively bland, without any of the dandelion’s gutsy 
radicchio-meets-rocket flavour.

Anyone who has tried it will also tell you that spinach is not the easiest 
crop to grow, with its tendency to bolt into flower at the slightest hint of 
being kept too dry or too hot. Dandelions, by contrast, literally plant 
themselves. They are also super high-yielding, and generate big bunches of 
pretty yellow flowers that are great for pollinators at the time of year when 
they need them most.

I grow mine by simply lifting dandelions that pop up on their own in my beds 
and borders (you don’t have to be to gentle about this) and planting them 
spaced about 30cm apart in a bed of rich soil. If they are in shadier spots, 
with a weekly douse of water, the leaves will grow far larger and lusher and 
have a milder flavour. Some growers will even cover plants in large buckets or 
terracotta pots for a few weeks in the early spring. In this dark environment 
the new growth will emerge primrose-yellow and elongated. This process, known 
as blanching, makes for milder, more tender leaves – exactly as is done for 
conventional chicory.

I love to eat them just as you would any salad green, or briefly sautéed in 
garlic, lemon and olive oil. They make an amazing salad tossed in the hot fat 
from crispy fried lardons along with a handful of croutons and a tablespoon of 
chopped chives. For years the idea of eating dandelions has come with 
associations of eccentricity, but strip the prejudices aside and all you are 
left with is a healthy, delicious chicory that requires next to no work to grow.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek 
<https://twitter.com/Botanygeek?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
