
It is the morning before my birthday. I am at the bedroom window, listening to 
my wife being charming to the waste-removal man on the pavement below.

“Shut up!” she says. He is telling her how much money she would have saved if 
she’d called him directly, instead of using the online service that 
subcontracts his company. “Oh, well,” she says. “Live and learn.” They laugh 
together.

I lean closer to the window and look down, accidentally catching the eye of 
the removal man’s six-year-old son, who is sitting in the cab of the truck. He 
regards me with cold suspicion – an old crone in an attic.

I go downstairs to bid goodbye to our junk: an old wardrobe, six rotting 
planks, a child’s mattress, some plastic tubing.

The last thing to go on the truck is my old bike – bent, rusted, missing 
important parts. I rode it everywhere for a decade, but for the last two years 
it’s just been something we lock the other bikes to. “Now I have no bike,” I 
say.

“We can get you a new bike for your birthday,” my wife says. “We can go right 
now.” I decide to seize the offer. It’s not so much her permission I require, 
as her brusque way with salespeople.

Thirty minutes later, we’re in a bike shop, looking at bikes. “I’m so bored,” 
my wife says.

“We’ve been here for nine seconds,” I say.

“Just buy one and let’s go,” she says.
 Illustration: Benoit Jacques for the Guardian 
The model I’m looking at costs four times what I paid for my old bike. A 
salesperson passes, in bike shorts. “I’m looking for a bicycle,” I say to him. 
“Something like this one.”

“Is it for you?” he says.

“Yes,” I say.

“These are the women’s bikes,” he says.

I look over at my wife, hoping she will say something amusingly belittling, 
but she’s playing with her phone. The man directs me to the men’s bike display 
and goes off to get a key.

“There’s no difference,” I say. “Women’s, men’s – they look exactly the same.”

“I hate this place,” my wife says. “It’s like being in a ski hire shop.”

“Yes,” I say. “It’s just like being in a ski hire shop with you.”

The salesperson strongly recommends I take my preferred model for a test ride. 
Already I feel overcommitted. The good thing about spending £99 on a bicycle, I 
realise, is that no one cares whether you’re happy or not.

Over the course of an hour, I test two bikes and pass through the hands of 
three salespeople. After settling on a discounted hybrid, I tell the latest 
salesperson that I need a lock.

We approach the display wall, my wife following. “So…” the salesman says.

“This is the bit where you try to sell him an 80 quid lock,” my wife says.

“Well,” says the salesman. “You will want a… ”

“He doesn’t need an 80 quid lock,” she says, pulling another lock off its 
hook. “What about this one?”

“That’s a £7 lock,” I say.

Related: Tim Dowling: if the exams were stressful, half-term is worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/04/exams-half-term-stress-tim-dowling>

“You could bite through that,” the salesman says.

“This is ridiculous,” my wife says.

“I’m sorry,” I say. “But you’ll have to leave.”

“Me?” my wife says.

“He has to do his lock speech, and I have to nod sceptically,” I say.

“It really is important to have a secure… ”

“Eventually, he’ll allow me to get the 50 quid lock,” I say.

“Don’t be stupid,” my wife says.

“All this has to happen,” I say. “And it won’t happen with you here. You’re 
free to go.”

“Fine,” she says, walking out of the shop.

I turn to the salesman and wait for him to proceed. And I think: happy 
birthday to me.
