
Early in their marriage, Reenee Singh and Stephen Fitzpatrick hit a difficult 
time and went for counselling. “The fact that we were an interracial couple – I 
am Indian, Stephen white British – wasn’t seen as particularly significant. Yet 
we realised in time how key cultural problems were to the breakdown in our 
communication,” she says.

“The therapy was helpful in other ways, but I was seen as oversensitive when I 
minded, for instance, being seen as the nanny with our baby because he was 
pale-skinned and fair-haired. Or I found it upsetting that Stephen thought I 
was trying to crowd out the intimacy in our relationship by filling the house 
with friends and family – the thing Indian families do. I began to feel 
isolated from the life I wanted to lead. We withdrew emotionally from each 
other.”

Singh, a family systemic psychotherapist and editor of the Journal of Family 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Therapy, had “a kind of 
epiphany”. She says: “I was seeing a great many intercultural couples in my 
practice, yet I knew most family therapy on offer does not take into account 
the intercultural aspect of relationships, even when people from sometimes 
startlingly different cultures are at loggerheads because of misunderstandings 
over their beliefs, rituals, expectations, parenting approaches, ways of 
communicating, and racism within the extended family.”

Related: Nearly one in ten people in England and Wales in inter-ethnic 
relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2014/jul/03/nearly-one-in-ten-people-in-england-and-wales-in-inter-ethnic-relationship>

On Monday Singh launches the Intercultural Couples Centre, based at the Child 
and Family Practice <http://www.tcfp.org.uk/> in London, to offer constructive 
help with cultural diversity. It is predicted that, by 2030,50% of people in 
London will have been born overseas 
<http://www.tcfp.org.uk/the-london-intercultural-couples-centre/>, while the 
number of people in England and Wales living with, or married to, someone from 
another cultural group is now one in 10. Meanwhile, the number of people 
described on census forms as “mixed” or “multiple” ethnicity almost doubled 
from 660,000 in 2001 to 1.2 million in 2011, making it by far the 
fastest-growing category, according toanalysis from the Office for National 
Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/marriagecohabitationandcivilpartnerships/articles/whatdoesthe2011censustellusaboutinterethnicrelationships/2014-07-03>
.

Of course, diverse culture may bring a happy celebration of difference, but 
more often it can tear at the roots of the family. Yet an all-party 
parliamentary group that, on Tuesday, publishes a report into ways of 
strengthening families in Britain has barely acknowledged cultural issues, says 
Singh.

The couples centre will be the first of its kind, says one of Singh’s two 
co-directors, Janet Reibstein: “We give lip service to ‘multiculturalism’, but 
many more of us live within the, until now, unspoken challenges within intimate 
and domestic lives. Yet there often can be very creative and fruitful solutions 
to living within two cultures in one family.”

Reibstein helped design the range of services the centre will offer – 
prenuptial counselling because, Singh says, “there is an added layer of 
potential conflict from the minute intercultural couples meet.

Parents of mixed-race children cannot share the experience of growing up as 
mixed… often it is assumed they are adopted
Dinah Morley, co-author of Mixed Experiences 
“Prenuptial counselling will cover the type of ritual planned for the 
marriage; building bridges with extended families who are against the 
relationship; [deciding] what parenting styles they want, [and whether] the 
adopted country feels like home – so that they have started the conversation 
they need to have before finding themselves hitting the pressure points.”

Pressures can become particularly acute when children are born and strife may 
replace an erstwhile liberal and accepting lifestyle. For example, one or both 
parents may feel passionately that children should be brought up with a 
particular faith; one partner may insist, against the will of the other, on a 
very rigid upbringing; and whose language will be used as the family lingua 
franca? Can they agree on how to honour the child’s cultural heritage?

Parents may also have to deal with what it means to their children to be mixed 
race. For some it can be a source of bullying – Singh remembers the shock for 
her and Stephen when Gabriel, their four-year-old son, was teased and tormented 
at school for having an Indian middle name – and parents may struggle with 
trying to empathise with a child who feels he or she doesn’t belong properly to 
any culture.

Dinah Morley is former deputy director at the YoungMinds 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/> charity and co-author with Cathy Street of 
Mixed Experiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/feb/23/mixed-race-children-mental-health>
 – a report into the variety of ways families deal with “mixedness” by 
supporting, ignoring or emphasising it. Morley says there is evidence that 
mixed-race children have more mental health problems than those with one 
cultural identity and may feel their parents cannot understand what they are 
going through. Morley says: “Parents of mixed-race children do not share 
appearance and culture as is usual with monoculture children. They cannot share 
the experience of growing up as mixed and often it is assumed these children 
are adopted.”

So Singh sees her work as giving couples, whose cultures may not be big on 
expressing emotions, the chance “to have the conversation, say what they feel 
to each other and learn to see what they share, not just what separates them”. 
With palpable pleasure she describes families that have learned to use both 
partners’ languages within the home, and points to a Jewish Muslim family where 
the children are encouraged to celebrate both cultures, and describe themselves 
as “Jewlims”.

As for her own relationship, Reenee has limited the number of those full-house 
weekends, while Stephen now buys the food and helps organise the big annual 
Diwali celebration.

Relationships under pressure

SUE, 41, AUSTRALIAN, AND NAZIR, 39, AFGHAN

 When Sue married Nazir they lived a liberal western lifestyle, but when their 
first child was born, Nazir insisted he be raised in the Muslim faith. He also 
began talking to the child in Arabic, which distressed Sue: “I did not speak 
this and it felt like a deliberate way of excluding me.”

It angered Nazir when she protested at this and other ways in which she felt 
he was becoming more controlling. “Then he started hitting me,” she says, “and 
his loyalty seemed to be entirely with his birth family.” Nor did it help when 
her friends took the line: “What do you expect coming from his culture?”

Nazir agreed to therapy when social services threatened to step in, and signed 
a contract promising to stop the violence towards his wife. At the same time 
the therapist helped Sue understand how powerless Nazir was feeling, as men who 
have left their cultural roots and families can do, often having never learned 
to use an emotionally intelligent approach to problem solving.

Therapy helped the couple see how great the differences in their cultures and 
backgrounds were. They learned to negotiate the language problem by agreeing to 
speak French together and to their child. Alone, Nazir would speak Arabic to 
his son. During the therapy Nazir said how valuable it was to be allowed to 
talk about emotions and to realise his wife could be an equal. They say they 
reached a long-forgotten closeness.

DINA, 29, AND AMIN, 25

 The couple are both Bangladeshi. However, she grew up in Britain, he in 
Bangladesh and neither spoke more than a few phrases of the other’s language. 
Theirs was an arranged marriage, wherein Amin moved to the UK. They had four 
children but continued to have huge problems with communication, while their 
13-year-old daughter began drinking and gradually started to move outside her 
parents’ control.

It was then that social services suggested therapy with Reenee Singh, who 
brought in a male interpreter. Dina explained how frustrating it was that she 
could not even say “I love you” to Amin. She began talking about her feelings, 
and she listened to him talking from his perspective. Singh tells how Amin then 
began an intensive English course and by the end of their therapy did not need 
an interpreter to explore the many issues they had had to confront.

And as Amin and Dina became demonstrably more loving, he assimilated better to 
his new home and stopped nagging his daughter to wear a hijab that set her 
apart from her peers. She in turn stopped her wild behaviour. Singh is proud of 
how well they have done: “They really are living happily ever after.”

Names have been changed
