
Journalists and members of the public are to get more access to a specialist 
court where judges analyse issues relating to sick and vulnerable people under 
a pilot scheme launched by judicial heads.


An experiment which will allow people to attend hearings in the court of 
protection is officially starting on Friday.

Most hearings in the court of protection have been held in private – although 
judges sit in public when they consider issues relating to serious medical 
treatment.

Officials say staff will begin preparing paperwork for new open court hearings 
on Friday – although judges are not likely to begin routinely sitting in public 
for some weeks.

They say a backlog of cases already being heard in private will need to clear.

The experiment has been launched in the wake of moves to allow reporters more 
access to family court hearings – which are also normally staged behind closed 
doors.

Judges will usually make orders preventing the identities of people at the 
centre of court of protection litigation being revealed, officials say, while

court staff will ask reporters and members of the public for identity details 
and copies of court orders and reporting restrictions will be provided.

Cases are currently listed by numbers but officials say as part of the pilot 
scheme, listings will be changed to give an indication of what cases are about.

Sir James Munby, the most senior court of protection judge in England and 
Wales, says the launch of the pilot scheme is a logical step.

“For the last six years, accredited media have been able to attend family 
court cases and have been better informed about the work of the family court as 
a result,” said Munby, who is the president of the court of protection and the 
president of the family division of the high court.

“It is logical to look at extending this greater transparency to the court of 
protection, provided the right balance can be struck to safeguard the privacy 
of people who lack capacity to make their own decisions.”

A court of protection judge said in late 2014 that the public should get more 
information about the workings of the court.

District judge Anselm Eldergill, who is based in London, said there seemed to 
be “no good reason” for preventing journalists from attending hearings.

He also said listings posted outside courtroom doors and online should reveal 
more detail about the nature of cases.

Eldergill outlined his thoughts in a speech to lawyers at a conference in 
Manchester, where issues relating to the court of protection were being 
discussed.

He said the “default position” should be that people at the centre of court of 
protection hearings were anonymised in any reports of proceedings, but that in 
principle journalists should be allowed to attend hearings.

Justice minister Caroline Dinenage said: “I’m pleased that we are piloting a 
new more open, more transparent court of protection.

“It’s right the public and the media should be able to see justice being done 
in this important court, while protecting the privacy of the people involved.”

A lawyer who specialises in court of protection cases said she hoped that the 
pilot scheme would lead to better public understanding.

“This scheme has been widely anticipated and we will be keeping a close eye on 
how it progresses,” said Julia Lomas, national head of the court of protection 
team at law firm Irwin Mitchell.

“It was controversial when the family courts opened up to accredited media in 
2009 but it has been generally viewed as a positive step forward so it will be 
interesting to see the results of the pilot scheme.

“We hope that the access will give the public a greater understanding of the 
court of protection’s work, offer more transparency and help explain how the 
decisions were reached in these cases.

“Whether the scheme is a success will largely depend on whether the press are 
able to act responsibly, and within the public interest, when reporting the 
often shocking details featured in these cases.

“The wellbeing of the vulnerable people in these cases, who are largely unable 
to defend their privacy against an over-intrusive press, must remain paramount.”
