
The UK’s two leading public health bodies, representing thousands of doctors 
and other professionals, are making an unprecedented call for the personal 
possession and use of drugs to be decriminalised.

The war on drugs has done more harm than good, say the Royal Society for 
Public Health <https://www.rsph.org.uk/> and the Faculty of Public Health 
<http://www.fph.org.uk/>. They argue that drug misuse should be a health issue, 
not a matter for the courts and prisons, which have not succeeded in deterring 
people from taking drugs. More people than ever before are being harmed by 
drugs and then harmed again by the punishment meted out, instead of being 
helped to kick or contain the habit, they say.

“We have taken the view that it is time for endorsing a different approach,” 
said Shirley Cramer, chief executive of the Royal Society. “We have gone to our 
stakeholders and asked the public and tried to gain some consensus from our 
community and the public, because that is very important.”

The society commissioned a poll of more than 2,000 UK adults and found that 
more than half – 56% – agreed that drug users in their local area ought to be 
referred for treatment, rather than charged with a criminal offence. Fewer than 
a quarter – 23% – disagreed.

The public health specialists, whose work involves preventing disease through 
measures such as helping people to quit smoking, say there should be no 
leniency for those who sell drugs. “We think that people who are dealing drugs 
and the producers and suppliers absolutely should be prosecuted,” said Cramer. 
“But for people who have got a drug problem, why treat them differently from 
someone who has an alcohol problem or an obesity problem?”

The society has produced a report, Taking a New Line on Drugs 
<http://www.rsph.org.uk/filemanager/root/site_assets/our_work/areas_of_work/tanlod/RSPH-TANLOD-Pages.pdf>
, which the faculty has endorsed. A key recommendation is that all children and 
young people learn about drugs in school through personal, social, health and 
economic education (PHSE). “One of the things that strikes us in public health 
is how important the education piece is – and that we are missing,” said 
Cramer. Where there is provision, she said, “it is patchy; it depends on the 
school”.

The experts also want lead responsibility for drug policy to be moved from the 
Home Office to the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, where it should be aligned more 
closely with alcohol and tobacco strategies. Drugs should be better classified 
according to the harm they do, the bodies argue, adding that the current 
classification confuses the public.

Alcohol tops the society’s list of the 10 most harmful drugs 
<https://www.rsph.org.uk/en/policy-and-projects/areas-of-work/taking-a-new-line-on-drugs/top-10-most-harmful-substances.cfm>
, with heroin second and crack cocaine third. Tobacco is in sixth place, while 
cannabis is eighth.

The report is being published before the anticipated release of the 
government’s drug strategy, which is expected some time after the referendum. 
It admires the Portuguese model, in which drug possession is still illegal, but 
users are referred to treatment and support programmes, rather than being 
prosecuted. It argues that prosecution and jail sentences cause further harm, 
including greater exposure to drugs in prison and the severing of family 
relationships. They are also barriers to education and employment, the report 
says.

Professor John Middleton, president of the faculty, said: “We need a new, 
people-centred approach to drug policy, rooted in public health and the best 
available evidence. This report is an important part of a growing, powerful 
evidence base that sets out what that approach should look like.

“The time for reframing the global approach to illicit drugs is long overdue. 
The imbalance between criminal justice and health approaches to illicit drugs 
is counterproductive. Criminalisation and incarceration for minor, non-violent 
offences worsen problems linked to illicit drug use, such as social inequality, 
violence and infection. Possession and use should be decriminalised and health 
approaches prioritised.”

Professor David Nutt, who heads the Centre for Neuropsychopharmacology at 
Imperial College London, said: “I fully support the recommendations in this 
report. The current government approach of blindly prosecuting drug users, 
rather than trying to reduce the rising tide of drug harms, particularly deaths 
from alcohol, heroin and cocaine, in fact leads to more damage to individuals 
and society – and more costs to the taxpayer.”

A Home Office spokesman said: “The UK’s approach on drugs remains clear - we 
must prevent drug use in our communities and support people dependent on drugs 
through treatment and recovery.

“At the same time, we have to stop the supply of illegal drugs and tackle the 
organised crime behind the drugs trade.”

He said there had been a drop in drug misuse over the last decade and more 
people are recovering from dependency now than in 2009/10.
