
Being a student isn’t all dorm parties and pillow forts, no matter what 
happens in the movies. It’s easy to knock a twentysomething’s confidence and 
for students it’s especially easy to feel that your academic work isn’t cutting 
it. But there are simple ways to feel more confident, with or without an 
inspiring Hollywood montage.

1. If you find criticism hard, know you’re not alone

 If you feel like you can’t catch a break with work, you’re not the only one. 
Anne Ford is a counsellor and head ofPeer Support 
<https://www.ox.ac.uk/students/welfare/peer?wssl=1>, a support network of 
students at the University of Oxford. She explains that when students work hard 
to get into university only to have their work criticised, it can “feel like 
they have been told that they aren’t good enough”.


Students <http://www.theguardian.com/education/students> can also feel 
“imposter syndrome”, where they “imagine that everyone is doing better than 
they are or that the university will discover that they are not good enough to 
be there”. It’s important to remember that many students feel out of place and 
out of depth. Your experience isn’t an isolated one.


2. Know that there is always help

Stress may not only affect you within working hours. Knowing this, many 
universities have set up extra care and support. For example, Kingston 
University has recently launched an online system,Silvercloud 
<http://www.kingston.ac.uk/health/wellbeing-services/>, which allows students 
24-hour access to help. Although stress can strike at any time, there is always 
help at hand. It’s reassuring to know that stress does not run to a schedule 
for anyone.

3. Adjust to change

Being treated as an independent thinker whose ideas are valued can take 
getting used to. Leila Parsa, 21, a student welfare officer and law student at 
the University of Oxford, says: “you’re much more exposed now that your work is 
based on your own opinions and convictions. It’s easy to see how people take 
criticism more personally at university.” .

However, a shift in perspective can make a world of difference. “The best way 
to view a tutor is as a sounding board for your ideas,” Parsa says. Ford 
agrees: “Universities want their students to do well and succeed, so the sooner 
you raise your concerns the better”. Try to see your work in progress – and 
enjoy the challenges that come with independent study.

4. If you get something wrong, figure out how to fix it

Despite what you’ve seen in the film Clueless, confidence isn’t as easy as a 
glossy makeover. Work out if it’s a problem with your process – are you 
spending too much time preparing to write, or are you trying to answer too many 
questions at once? If so, it might be helpful to consult your university’s 
student counseling services, Ford advises. Focusing in on problems is the most 
efficient way to combat them. And it often means that they’re more manageable 
than they seemed in your head.

Related: Wish you were more confident at uni? Six myths are stopping you 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/02/wish-you-were-more-confident-at-uni-six-myths-are-stopping-you>

5. Find a support network 

Living without family for the first time is daunting, but you’re surrounded by 
other young students. That creates an automatic support group. Parsa and her 
fellow law students share their essays with each other once they’re marked, as 
a way to “gain a new perspective”. Having another student benefit from reading 
through your essay is a great vote of confidence.

Support groups can also teach students how to support themselves 
independently. At Kingston University, stress management groups help students 
to “develop the skills needed to help them manage their own stress”. One of 
their focuses is assertiveness, as it helps with communication and time 
management. This line of thinking allows you to approach a wider array of 
problems – from work projects to scheduling – instead of just solving 
individual problems.

6. Balance is key

Finding a balance between work and play is crucial. Cecelia Herbert, 21, is 
studying for a degree in experimental psychology at the University of Oxford. 
She helps run Students for Happiness, a non-profit that was started in London 
in 2012. It aims to “educate about happiness and wellbeing through discussion, 
events and workshops”. Having struggled in her first year of university, she 
says she would have benefited from events like these.

Reflecting on your priorities is important; it’s risky to depend on an essay 
grade for your happiness. By finding other sources of happiness, you won’t 
fixate on your work. There are endless opportunities at university, whether you 
start a campaign or set up a society. That isn’t just healthier for your 
wellbeing – it could make all the difference to your work-approach and results.


7. Stay mindful

Universities are increasingly offering mindfulness workshops for students. At 
University College London (UCL), a “10 Minute Mind 
<http://www.ucl.ac.uk/student-psychological-services/Mindfulness>” programme 
has been designed to help students relax. Each morning students receive new 
exercises to practise. Catherine McAteer, head of student psychological 
services, explains that its aim is to shift students’ concern about the past or 
future to staying in the present moment. And as it just takes ten minutes, 
following the programme is easily achievable.


It may take a little imagination but finding out what works best for you reaps 
long-lasting benefits. Jessica Benghiat, 21, a geography student at the 
University of Bristol, enjoys mindfulness colouring after a stressful day at 
uni. She says it sets her up for a productive day following a good night’s 
sleep: “I’ll often colour before bed and it makes me more calm before I fall 
asleep.”

8. Proceed with kindness

Imagine if your best friend told you about their problems. Ford asks, “what 
would you say to them? Would it be critical, or supportive and encouraging?” 
Most of us wouldn’t dream of talking to our friends the way we talk to 
ourselves – otherwise we wouldn’t have many left. Changing the way you talk to 
yourself about criticism creates a healthier conversation.

Most importantly, you should remember that there is no quick fix for building 
confidence: “Part of learning is experiencing struggle, frustration and being 
less than perfect,” Ford says. If “less than perfect” sounds like settling, it 
shouldn’t; it might just help you get to where you want to be.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter
