
Reality shows are all the rage here in America, so I started my own. First, I 
"obtained" five neighbours by saying I had something cool to show them in my 
basement. Like sheep, they followed me down, and I locked the door of the 
"SimuHome". When I told them they were part of my new reality show, I Am God 
And You Are My Lowly Creatures, they got so happy they went quiet. Then they 
ate the special cupcakes I'd left, made of amnesia-inducing batter, and forgot 
they were even in my basement, or had ever been anywhere else.

I installed an intercom, so I could communicate with my "creations". Also a 
little chute down which to drop food, personal hygiene products and what I call 
"game stimulators" - cockroaches, say, or firecrackers, or, once, when I'd been 
drinking, a live rabid mongoose. Sometimes I make it "rain" by activating the 
"rain system". Sometimes I make it winter by activating the "very cold" system. 
Sometimes there may be a "famine". Once, I released a "nausea-inducing virus" 
concealed in a "coconut cake". Once I simulated a plague by throwing down some 
potato chips laced with, well, plague.

It's been interesting to watch the reactions. Some have taken to "praying" - 
ie, shouting supplications. Do I listen? Well, in a sense. Sometimes, I send 
down exactly what they request. Other times, I send down the opposite. Say 
someone "prays" for water. I may send down peanut butter. Other times I ignore 
them for weeks. That really frustrates them.

Weekly, this group gathers to - I blush to say it - "worship" me. Though they 
can't remember ever having seen me, they are sure I am good, and love them, and 
- this is the funny part - resemble them. Well, believe me, I do not resemble 
Shirley or Bennett. They wish! I kind of resemble Ed - Ed is a good-looking guy 
- but he's not part of the praying group. Ed is part of "the stoics". They (Ed 
and Hilda) are so inert, I am not entirely sure they have not, in fact, 
expired. It may have been the plague. I'll have to check by dressing all in 
white some night and appearing to Ed/Hilda in "a vision" - see if that gets any 
motion going.

A third group (Sally, Roger, Carol) "try to make the best of it". They have 
sing-alongs, throw parties, develop love interests, spout slogans such as, 
"What doesn't destroy us will make us stronger!" Cute.

Next week, the conclusion: I'll unlock the door and up the stairs they'll 
come, and will wander outside (aka "heaven"), and (for the first time in their 
memories) glimpse the sky, all of them, regardless of how they comported 
themselves in my basement.
