
The Glastonbury festival magics up a small, temporary city in rural Somerset – 
a city with its own health service, staffed largely byNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> professionals. Until last year, they 
had no precise way to locate people in emergencies, instead relying on a 
large-scale grid and their volunteers’ knowledge of the site.

Festival Medical Services <http://festival-medical.org/> (FMS) is a charity 
set up in 1979 to provide healthcare for the Glastonbury festival. This year, 
the charity will have 850 volunteers including doctors, nurses, podiatrists, 
ultrasound technicians, paramedics and dentists. “It’s the world’s biggest 
music festival, so it has to have the world’s best medical service,” says FMS 
operations director Dave Parry.

Imagine a field full of orange tents – ‘I’m by the third tent from the left’ 
doesn’t really narrow it down
Dave Parry, FMS operations director 
Until last year, the charity relied on a 10,000 sq metre grid coordinated with 
the names of various areas to locate people. “Imagine a field full of orange 
tents,” says Parry. “‘I’m by the third tent from the left’ doesn’t really 
narrow it down. We thought, ‘there’s got to be a better way to do this’.”

Parry was previously a locality manager for the Welsh ambulance service in 
Powys, the least-densely populated area of Wales. “We attended rural incidences 
where people had fallen from horses in remote areas,” he says. “It’s taken 
quite a long time to find them because of where they are.”

Last year, FMS trialled a location system from tech company What3Words 
<http://what3words.com/> at the Glastonbury festival, superimposing a new grid 
on an aerial image of the event on its opening morning, and asked its first 
responders to use the app on their smartphones.

What3Words allocates a unique three-word combination to each of the 57tn 
three-by-three sq metre areas covering the planet. Users can now locate the 
festival stone circle by inputting the three-word combination 
“pushy.inert.teaspoons” into the app.

The responders follow the crowds, so from 6am until midday, they concentrate 
on the market areas, moving later to the stage areas and on to the 
entertainment areas after the stages have closed. “We can normally get a 
responder to someone within 10-15 minutes, and if it’s a higher-priority call 
we get there a lot quicker,” he says.

What3Words was co-founded by Chris Sheldrick, an event manager who previously 
ran a music business organising events for musicians such as Lionel Ritchie and 
Billy Joel.

“This whole idea came from me giving an address, let’s say of a site entrance 
at a festival or event venue, to a load of musicians and suppliers and seeing 
the carnage that ensued when people put that into whatever their mapping app or 
satnav was,” says Sheldrick. “They used to show up at all sorts of places – 
none of which were correct.”

Trying to solve the problem, Sheldrick started providing latitude and 
longitude coordinates, which when used with a device with GPS such as a 
smartphone is usually accurate to within a few metres – particularly in the 
countryside where satellite signals can be clearly received. But doing so means 
entering figures precise to five decimal points.

“It’s just amazing how prone to human error they are,” says Sheldrick. “You’re 
dealing with a long string of numbers. We had truck drivers mixing up a four 
and a five and depositing all the equipment an hour north of Rome rather than 
an hour south of Rome.”

The word combinations are easier to remember, solving problems with lengthy 
longitude and latitude coordinates. To avoid confusion, the system keeps 
similar word combinations geographically separate – “pushy.inert.teaspoon” is a 
location in Texas and “inert.pushy.teaspoons” is in Alaska. “We’ve built it for 
human error,” says Sheldrick.

What3Words provides a free-to-download smartphone app that works with or 
without a network signal, with a computerised compass using GPS to point the 
way to a chosen location. The system is also available through a website, and 
can be used by other businesses for a fee.

Related: The NHS needs a strong dose of tech investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/jun/20/nhs-strong-dose-tech-investment>

The system – which is available in 12 languages – has been used by the Red 
Cross and local medical staff in Tanzania to map water points and collect 
samples during a cholera outbreak and also by a medical courier to deliver 
drugs to patients in the Khayelitsha township of Cape Town in South Africa.

At Glastonbury, the service is particularly useful when a responder needs to 
call for other staff or a vehicle, such as in cases of haemorrhage and trauma, 
or when they move away from their initially-reported location. “It was 
remarkably accurate,” says Parry. “It was able to pinpoint where responders 
were on site so we could dispatch the relevant assistance to them.” This year, 
he expects that some festival-goers will also begin using it to locate friends 
at events.

He believes that What3Words could be used for walkers, canoeists and marine 
rescue – its grid covers sea as well as land. “The potential is enormous.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.











