
What is happening?

On Friday, the Vatican <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican> will 
publish a papal document on Catholic family life. It follows two lengthy 
consultative summits of Catholic bishops in 2014 and 2015 to consider various 
family issues.


Pope Francis’s document is known formally as an “apostolic exhortation” and 
will be published under the title Amoris Laetitia – The Joy of Love.


After last October’s three-week synod to discuss the “vocation and mission of 
the family in the church and the modern world”, the 190 bishops who took part 
issued a long document for the pope to consider. The pope is now ready to sum 
up the two-year debate within the church and indicate a way forward.


An apostolic exhortation is a vehicle for the pope to communicate his views 
and encourage the church to follow them in practice, but does not change church 
doctrine.

What is at stake?

The two synods considered all aspects of family life in relation to the 
church’s teaching and wider society. Among the most controversial issues were 
divorce and remarriage, attitudes to same-sex partnerships and marriage, and 
unions that fall outside marriage. But the gathering of celibate men also 
discussed preparation for marriage, pornography and domestic violence.


The question of whether Catholics who have divorced and remarried should be 
allowed to take holy communion was a key subject of debate. Current church 
doctrine prohibits such people from taking communion unless they have obtained 
an annulment of their first marriage, as it views such second marriages as 
adulterous.


Liberal Catholics have argued that the church risks being out of touch with 
contemporary reality and that it is wrong to exclude people in second marriages 
and often, by extension, their children.


Conservatives have resisted any dilution of the church’s traditional teaching 
on marriage, including divorce, remarriage, same-sex relationships and couples 
who choose not to marry.


The October 2015 synod was marked by rows, leaks, denunciations and false 
reports. Bishops voted on the final communique paragraph by paragraph after 
more than 1,300 changes to the text were submitted 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-pope-synod-idUSKCN0SH2O620151023>.


In the end, they decided against overhauling the church’s teaching on gay 
Catholics, but adopted more welcoming language towards divorcees.

What will Francis say?

The pope is hard to predict. His instincts are inclusive and compassionate – 
“Who am I to judge?” he famously said when asked about gay people in the 
Vatican – and many of his pronouncements, such as on poverty and climate 
change, are radical.


But he is much less progressive on family and women’s issues. Although the 
language of his exhortation may be gentle, the general view is that he is 
unlikely to institute dramatic change.


On divorced and remarried Catholics, he may endorse the idea that decisions on 
their participation in the church should be made through what is called the 
“internal forum” – on a case-by-case basis, in private conversations between 
individuals and their priests.


A reading guide sent by the Vatican to Catholic bishops this week ahead of the 
release of Amoris Laetitia indicated that the pope was seeking to change the 
language around the family,according to National Catholic Reporter. 
<http://ncronline.org/news/vatican/vatican-guide-says-francis-family-document-puts-doctrine-service-pastoral-mission>

The guide said: “To talk about the family and to families, the challenge is 
not to change doctrine but to inculturate the general principles in ways that 
they can be understood and practised …


“Our language should encourage and reassure every positive step taken by every 
real family.”

Some have interpreted the Vatican’s choice of Austrian cardinal Christoph 
Schönborn to present the document as an indication that the pope is siding with 
progressives.


Schönborn – whose parents divorced when he was a teenager – was seen as a 
“leading exponent of the moderate-to-progressive position” on the issue of 
divorce, same-sex relationships and unions outside marriage,according to 
respected Vatican watcher John Allen 
<http://www.cruxnow.com/church/2016/03/31/cardinal-who-backs-progressives-tapped-to-present-family-manifesto/>
.

Will it make a difference?

The exhortation may be symbolically important but of little practical 
consequence, says Allen.


On divorce and communion, Allen points out 
<http://www.cruxnow.com/church/2016/04/02/popes-big-call-on-communion-may-mean-little-on-the-ground/>
 that “there are plenty of pastors who have quietly told these people it’s OK 
to come up in the communion line and receive the sacrament”. The number of 
divorced and remarried Catholics in the US is estimated at 4.5 million.

But, even without changing church teaching, Pope Francis’s language could 
produce a more tolerant attitude on the key issues, at least among those open 
to a new mindset.

How can I find out more?

The document, thought to be up to 200 pages long, will be published in 
Italian, French, English, German, Spanish and Portuguese on theVatican website 
<http://w2.vatican.va/content/vatican/en.html> at 11am BST on Friday.


A press conference will be streamed live on Vatican Radio <http://player.rv.va>
.
