
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is planning 
to embark on the most far-reaching reconstruction of his government next week 
as he promotes a new generation of women and younger men in an attempt to 
present a youthful and modern face of the Tory party to Britain at next year's 
general election.

A series of older men known as the "old lags" will be sacked – or will take 
matters into their own hands by announcing long-planned retirements – when the 
prime minister carries out his final planned cabinet reshuffle before the 
election.

The most senior Tory cabinet ministers – George Osborne 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, William Hague and Theresa 
May – are expected to remain in place as Cameron becomes the first prime 
minister since Tony Blair in 1997-2001 to keep the holders of the great offices 
of state in place for an entire parliament.

But a much wider than expected cabinet reshuffle will see significant changes 
amid signs that the former chancellor Kenneth Clarke, 74, the chief whip, Sir 
George Young, 73 on Wednesday, and the leader of the Commons,Andrew Lansley 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrewlansley>, 57, will leave the 
government.

Lansley still believes that he is in the running to be nominated as Britain's 
European commissioner, although there are strong voices saying it would be a 
grave mistake to appoint the man so closely associated with the government's 
unpopular reorganisation of the NHS.
 Theresa May, the home secretary, is expected to keep her post. Photograph: 
Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty 
The former chancellor Lord Lawson of Blaby, a climate change sceptic, has been 
leading a fightback to protect the environment secretary,Owen Paterson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-paterson>.

The new entrants are expected to include Esther McVey, the work and pensions 
minister and former television presenter, and the public policy expert Liz 
Truss. Nicky Morgan, who attends cabinet as minister for women, may be promoted 
to a full cabinet post. Greg Hands, the deputy chief whip and a key Osborne 
ally, is being associated with a promotion to chief whip as the chancellor 
extends his control over the government.

Sources close to Iain Duncan Smith 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> dismissed as nonsense 
claims that he would be moving from his post as work and pensions secretary. 
Senior figures at Westminster have been speculating that Duncan Smith, a former 
Scots Guards officer, might swap jobs with the defence secretary, Philip 
Hammond.

Osborne, who is concerned about the implementation of Duncan Smith's universal 
credit reform, tried to move him sideways to the Ministry of Justice in the 
last cabinet reshuffle in 2012. Cameron told the recent Tory summer ball that 
Duncan Smith was one of the three stars of his cabinet, alongside the 
chancellor and the home secretary.
 Employment minister Esther McVey is tipped for a cabinet role. Photograph: 
Leon Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
Friends of the prime minister are urging him to embark on a bold reshuffle 
because they believe he has a free hand to act as he chooses on the grounds 
that the departing ministers will be able to say that they served four years in 
government – the average length of a parliament in recent years. It is 
understood a large number of ministers have notified No 10 they would like to 
stand down from the government.

One ally said: "The prime minister can do pretty much as he likes. He has got 
carte blanche because he will be able to tell departing ministers that they 
have had a good run. There is a lot of support for the prime minister to be 
really bold by genuinely bringing forward large numbers of women – not simply 
to tweaking the odd post. Politics is all about freshness. This is a great 
chance to show the new and modern Tory party."

One senior Tory said: "You've got old lags preparing themselves for life after 
office and then the excitement and trauma of the new people. The assumption is 
that if it is merely a little bit of tinkering around the edges what's all this 
about? The hard-nosed logic is that this is the time to do quite a big change, 
making the assumption you are not touching Osborne, Hague and May.

"At the end of this reshuffle you want people to think this is a reinvigorated 
Conservative part of the coalition that are going to forcefully present 
Conservative party policies to the electorate. It is about momentum because you 
are arguing that these people could form a government on their own. The prime 
minister can say to a number of the people you have had a good run for your 
money and I have got to make space."
 Kenneth Clarke could be on the way out in the reshuffle. Photograph: Peter 
Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
Nick Clegg, acutely conscious that the five Liberal Democrat cabinet ministers 
are all men, is expected to promote the business minister Jo Swinson to the 
cabinet. But she is expected to succeed Alistair Carmichael as Scotland 
secretary after September's independence referendum in September if, as 
expected, the pro-Union side prevails. Carmichael would be praised for his role 
in the victory as Swinson took charge on introducing greater devolution to the 
Scottish parliament.

The prime minister is expected to announce the name of Britain's new European 
commissioner at the same time as the reshuffle. Cameron will ask Jean-Claude 
Juncker, the incoming European commission president, for an economics portfolio 
when they hold talks on the fringes of a European summit on Wednesday. Allies 
of the PM are urging him to consider heavyweight candidates such as former Tory 
MP and ITV chairman Archie Norman or the former Tory leader Lord Howard of 
Lympne. David Willetts, who may be replaced as universities minister by Truss, 
is also seen as a possible candidate.
