
Mark Thompson, the chief executive of the New York Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> and former director-general 
of the BBC, is facing a multimillion-dollar class action lawsuit alleging that 
he introduced a culture of “deplorable discrimination” based on age, race and 
gender at the newspaper.

The lawsuit, filed on behalf of two black female employees in their sixties in 
New York on Thursday, claims that under Thompson’s leadership the US paper of 
record has “become an environment rife with discrimination”.

The class action lawsuit, seen by the Guardian, alleges that the Times, which 
promotes its liberal and inclusive social values, preferentially favours its 
“ideal staffer (young, white, unencumbered with a family)” at the expense of 
older female and black employees.

“Unbeknownst to the world at large, not only does the Times have an ideal 
customer (young, white, wealthy), but also an ideal staffer (young, white, 
unencumbered with a family) to draw that purported ideal customer,” the 
lawsuit, which the women’s lawyer said could be extended to up to 50 similar 
alleged victims, states. “In furtherance of these discriminatory goals, the 
Times has created a workplace rife with disparities.”

Eileen Murphy, the Times’ head of communications, said: “This lawsuit contains 
a series of recycled, scurrilous and unjustified attacks on both Mark Thompson 
and Meredith Levien. It also completely distorts the realities of the work 
environment at the New York Times. We strongly disagree with any claim that The 
Times, Mr. Thompson or Ms. Levien have discriminated against any individual or 
group of employees. The suit is entirely without merit and we intend to fight 
it vigorously in court.”

The lawsuit, filed at the US district court of southern New York, claims that 
since Thompson became CEO of the Times in 2012, after eight years as 
director-general of the BBC, the paper’s advertising staff has been 
“systematically becoming increasingly younger and whiter”.

It is claimed that Thompson, who was in charge of the BBC during a series of 
scandals 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2098498/I-got-wrong-older-women-BBC-boss-admits-ARE-TV.html>
 over the way the broadcaster treats older women including newsreader Moira 
Stewart, Countryfile’s Miriam O’Reilly and Strictly Come Dancing’s Arlene 
Phillips, “brought his misogynistic and ageist attitudes across the Atlantic to 
New York City”.

Following an age-discrimination employment tribunal brought, and won, by 
O’Reilly in 2011, Thompson admitted that were was “an underlying problem, that 
– whatever the individual success stories – there are manifestly too few older 
women broadcasting on the BBC, especially in iconic roles and on iconic topical 
programmes”. He said the BBC had a duty to “develop and cherish” the “many 
outstanding women broadcasters” and ensure that they know “age will not be a 
bar to their future employment” at the broadcaster.

Thompson is said to have hired Meredith Levien, the company’s chief revenue 
office and a co-defendant, to “carry out his vision of the ideal workforce”. 
The lawsuit claims that under Thompson, who was paid $8.7m (£6m) last year, and 
Levien, who was paid $1.8m (£1.2m), “age, sex and race discrimination became 
the modus operandi at the Times”.

In speeches to staff, Levien is said to have made it clear that she wanted a 
workforce with “fresh faces” populated by “people who look like the people we 
are selling to”. She is alleged to have told staff that “this isn’t what our 
sales team should look like”. The advertising staff, many of whom are older, 
black and female, said Levien’s comments were “shockingly rife with racially 
charged innuendos”.

On its website <http://www.nytco.com/who-we-are/culture/diversity/> the NYT 
says it is “committed to an inclusive and diverse workforce that reflects the 
audience, readers and advertisers we serve” and has “a staff as wide as it is 
deep, broad in perspective, backgrounds and experiences” so as to “capture the 
multitude of voices of America and the world, with true fidelity”.

The claimants, Ernestine Grant, 62, and Marjorie Walker, 61, who work in the 
Times’ advertising department, dispute this. They claim that the company’s 
advertising directors, who had previously been a mix of races and ages, have 
become “increasingly younger and whiter”.

“Older advertising directors of color found themselves pushed out through 
buyouts, or outright terminated, but those vacancies were rapidly filled with 
younger, white individuals,” the lawsuit said.

They claim they were repeatedly passed over for promotion by younger white 
employees despite their greater experience. They also claims that “younger 
white individuals” at the same level as them are paid far more than they are. 
In addition, they claim they were “denied the opportunities to earn as much as 
[their] younger white peers because of her race and/or gender”.

Younger white employees in advertising were also allegedly given “summer 
Fridays”, afternoons off in the summer, while the perk was not offered to older 
employees of color.

Douglas Wigdor, a partner at Wigdor LLP who is representing the claimants, 
said: “It is astonishing that a news organization that regularly promotes 
liberal social viewpoints could have a double standard when it comes to 
blatantly discriminating and retaliating against its own hard working and 
dedicated employees.”

The lawsuit claims that the Times’ “gender inequality is so endemic” that Jill 
Abramson, the paper’s first female editor, was “unable to turn around the 
troubling realities of the newsroom” and was fired after she complained that 
she was paid less than her male peers and predecessors. She was replaced by 
Dean Baquet, the paper’s first African American editor. Abramson is now a 
regular contributor to the Guardian.

A 2014 survey by the Women’s Media Center 
<http://wmc.3cdn.net/2e85f9517dc2bf164e_htm62xgan.pdf> researchers found that 
the Times had the least female bylines, proportionally, of the nation’s 10 
largest newspapers. The study found that 69% of stories were written by men and 
75% of opinion writers being male.
