
More and more businesses are realising the value of customer relationship 
management (CRM). It just makes sense. If you can create and maintain a 
relationship with a prospect or customer, it builds trust and consideration, 
which makes them more likely to buy from you, remain with you and ultimately 
recommend you.


But if everyone embraces CRM, surely the competitive advantages mentioned 
above are lost (in spite of the fact we’re all generally raising the bar from a 
customer experience perspective)?

Well, yes. That’s assuming everyone executes their CRM programmes to a similar 
standard. However, that is rarely the case. We come across organisations all 
the time that have invested significantly in CRM tech without knowing how to 
use it effectively. Or others who have invested in well thought-through contact 
strategies, but then decide to get the intern to develop their email copy.

If you’re looking to develop a CRM programme that stands out, here are three 
tips.

Don’t neglect the end product 

Many CRM communications lack engagement, empathy and interest. You need to 
invest real effort to ensure whatever you say lands in the most powerful way 
possible in order to provoke interaction.

We use an “engagement framework” to help us do this.

Think beyond email and direct marketing

Omni-channel CRM is the future. There are clever techniques we use now, which 
allow brands to target highly personalised messages at customers wherever they 
are
online (as if you were talking to them directly).

Build data knowledge and insight

Too many CRM programmes rely solely on transactional data. Attitudinal data 
can significantly enrich this. One of our tech tools allows brands to harvest 
this additional information on an ongoing basis, which in turn helps them 
super-charge the effectiveness of their communications.

Guy McConnell is managing director at BURN <http://www.burnmarketing.com/>

This advertisement feature is paid for by the Marketing Agencies Association 
<http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, which supports the Guardian Media & 
Tech Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
