
The tributes over, MPs on both sides of the house rose to applaud Jo Cox. 
Moments later, up in the gallery, her sister Kim stood to clap both Jo and the 
MPs who had honoured her memory so movingly. One by one the rest of her family 
joined in. First her mother, then her father and finally her husband Brendan 
and their two children, Cuillin and Lejla. There were more tears, more smiles 
and the occasional wave down to friends as the MPs walked out of the Commons to 
attend a service of thanksgiving across the road at St Margaret’s church on 
Westminster Square.

Finally the chamber was empty, except for the white and red roses that had 
been placed in Jo’s usual seat on the opposition benches. White for Yorkshire, 
red for Labour. The Commons officials came in to tidy the papers on the 
dispatch box and make sure no one had left anything behind, but no one touched 
the roses. It was the most poignant of moments in a heartbreaking session. The 
roses were going nowhere. Neither was Jo. She might never be returning to the 
house, but she was also never going to be leaving it. Something of her would 
survive. Not nearly enough, but something.

As Jeremy Corbyn opened the speeches with a measured tribute that concentrated 
mainly on Jo the Labour MP, a child’s voice interrupted the Labour leader, 
bringing the personal agonisingly into the room. It was Lejla talking to her 
dad, too young to take in exactly what was happening and yet more than old 
enough to perfectly articulate how so many people were feeling. In the midst of 
so much silence, everyone craved noise. Anything was preferable to the 
unbearable emptiness. Yet the chatter was also a reminder of how much had been 
lost. Not just a promising young MP and lifelong campaigner for the 
dispossessed, but a mother, wife, daughter and sister.

The personal and political might often have been one and the same thing for 
Jo, but the personal was where the pain was most felt, something later 
acknowledged by MPs on both sides of the house. Politicians might not have 
covered themselves in glory during the referendum campaign, but here was a 
reminder of their intrinsic humanity. If only it hadn’t taken the killing of 
one of their own for some of them to show it. David Cameron’s voice broke as he 
recalled how he had first met Jo when she was working in the refugee camps of 
Darfur. The prime minister may have his faults, but he understands loss.

It was all too much for Rachel Reeves, who had been Jo’s friend and mentor. 
She had begun by talking of boozy nights on her houseboat before moving on to 
the role model she had been for other women and the sense of a potential 
unfulfilled, but she cracked when she came to the children. “No one can replace 
a mother,” she said, in tears, overwhelmed by a sense of identification.

The Conservative MPs Andrew Mitchell and Cheryl Gillan spoke of Jo’s 
humanitarian work, but most of the speakers were understandably friends and 
colleagues on the Labour benches. Fellow Yorkshire MPs Holly Lynch and Barry 
Sheerman talked of her commitment to her constituency of Batley and Spen, and 
Stephen Doughty reminded everyone that she had a bit of edge to her. “She told 
me I was being far too touchy-feely in one meeting,” he recalled. “And she 
could make herself a right royal pain in the backside.” This wasn’t parliament 
going through the motions of paying its respects to one of its own as sometimes 
happens. It was real and heartfelt. Jo may have only been an MP for little more 
than a year, but she had touched people’s lives.

Time and again, speakers referred back to her maiden speech, in which she had 
declared “we have more in common than that which divides us”. But only Labour’s 
Stephen Kinnock dared make the connection that others had been careful to 
avoid. After picking out “the calculated cynicism” of Nigel Farage’s poster 
launch on the day of her death, he went to add that “childish rhetoric has 
consequences”. Fatal ones.

Several Vote Leave MPs didn’t look best pleased to have the referendum linked 
to Jo’s death, but now was not the time or place to say so. They would have to 
sit and take it. As a wholehearted believer in the EU, Jo would probably have 
enjoyed their discomfort. The longer the tributes went on, the more a 
three-dimensional Jo began to take shape. A proper human being. Committed, 
passionate and complicated in equal measure. By the end it was almost possible 
to imagine her sitting there wondering what all the fuss was about. Except she 
wasn’t. There were just two roses.
