
What is mindfulness?

Emma Roberts, managing director, Pause for Thought and guest lecturer on 
mindfulness at Bradford University: Mindfulness for me a way of being in the 
world, being present in the here and now with loving compassion which begins 
with yourself and extends to others.Mindfulness 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/mindfulness> practice is about 
training the mind to give full attention to what is happening ... It improves 
your relationship with yourself and others and is process of maintaining a good 
sense of health and wellness emotionally and physically.


Yasu Kotera, academic lead for counselling and CBT, University of Derby Online 
Learning <http://www.derby.ac.uk/online/academics/yasuhiro-kotera>: There are 
several definitions but one of the most common one is ‘it is awareness that 
arises through paying attention, on purpose, in the present moment, 
non-judgmentally’. It’s about knowing what is on your mind.

In what situations can health and social care professionals use mindfulness?

Lucy Maddox, MBCT (mindfulness based cognitive therapy) trained consultant 
clinical psychologist working with teenagers in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in Bristol: It’s useful for staff 
groups to practise as a way of reducing burnout, and for sharing with patients 
as a way of helping with a range of different problems, and a skill for helping 
to be responsive to situations rather than reactive.

Vidyamala Burch, co-founder, Breathworks 
<http://www.breathworks-mindfulness.org.uk/>: It can help dial down stress at 
any time, but it is also useful to practise it as a preventative strategy by 
embedding a session of mindfulness meditation into your day.

Roberts: It can help with reflection for supervision, engaging service users, 
resolving conflict with clients and colleagues, improving your boundaries in 
the workplace, increasing your awareness of your stress levels by understanding 
emotional and psychological triggers of your own. This increases your ability 
to mirror those skills in your dealings with clients so it makes you more 
psychologically minded so you can attend to others in a more thoughtful 
compassionate and considered manner.

Are there any drawbacks or particular situations where mindfulness is not the 
answer?

Burch: Mindfulness is not generally recommended for those experiencing active 
psychosis or other severe and acute mental health illness.

Kotera: Mindfulness isn’t a catch all thing. There are some situations where 
people need specific interventions to do something in particular. Mindfulness 
is also not for everyone – there can be negative effects particularly if 
someone has previously unresolved trauma. Mindfulness could make things worse 
and have a significantly negative effect on the person.

How are health and social care experts expected to evaluate the efficacy of 
mindfulness?

Kotera: Contrary to what some might say, it is possible to evaluate a therapy 
like mindfulness. When we compare this to a therapy like, for example, hip 
replacements then there clearly is a difference. We can quantitatively measure 
the improvement in quality of life versus costs for hip replacements – it’s not 
necessarily appropriate to quantitatively measure something like mindfulness so 
we can look to other means. We can conduct very in-depth qualitative research 
to gather the individual person’s experience and there are some excellent 
frameworks for doing so.

What potential is there for using mindfulness with young people?

Hayley Gillard, wellbeing coach, chief executive of Self Care Compass: I’ve 
run some mindfulness based sessions with young people and as an ecotherapist (I 
work with nature as a therapy) I used the outdoors to improve their experience. 
We did a campfire cookout and then used the gathering of the natural materials 
or the calming effect of staring at the flames to teach people about being 
present and aware of their emotions/reactions. I’ve found running a session 
that isn’t necessarily called a mindfulness session has made it much more 
accessible for young people.


Roberts: I think young people are often more psychologically minded and open 
to mindfulness and so respond quicker as it is working with staying in the 
moment.

What does the future hold for mindfulness in health and social care?

Gillard: I’d like to see patients considered holistically – emotionally as 
well as from a psychological and physical point of view. There are thousands of 
in-field experts who can help, provide services and give advice and I’d love to 
see a more joined up approach. Mindfulness is incredible and I’m so pleased it 
is becoming mainstream as it is available through theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

Related: Mindfulness: an effective mental health treatment but not a panacea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/may/14/mindfulness-mental-health-treatment-nhs>

Kotera: Cultural adaptation/comparison may be an interesting area for 
mindfulness. Although meditation has been practised from over 2000 years ago in 
the east, it hadn’t been researched scientifically since around 1980. It’s a 
combination of the eastern philosophy and the western science. When it’s 
applied to people from different backgrounds, it needs some adjustment. Finding 
it, and adjusting the practice may be interesting to see.

Burch: Seventy per cent of NHS spend is on chronic health. Mindfulness is 
cheap (group-based, no expensive equipment etc), effective (lots of studies to 
back this up); so I’d like to see it as a standard offering from GP clinics, to 
hospitals, to clinics dealing with specific health conditions.

Maddox: I’d like greater understanding of which aspects of mindfulness are 
most effective for which populations and a greater general understanding of the 
key principles of mindfulness and how these differ from relaxation.

Discussion commissioned and controlled by the Guardian, funded by the 
University of Derby

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
