
The loss of one of Brazil’s most fundamental tools against slave labour amid 
the country’s worst recession in more than 100 years presents a serious risk of 
worker exploitation before the Olympic Games, according to labour activists.

Luiz Machado, national coordinator of Brazil’s anti-slavery programme at the 
International Labour Organisation (ILO), warns that the suspension of the 
so-calleddirty list 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/brazil-dirty-list-names-shames-slave-labour>
 of companies caught using slave labour, combined with an extremely 
conservative congress and rising unemployment, creates the possibility for a 
rise in modern-day slavery.


“We have recently seen an increase in child labour, and this is usually linked 
to an increase in slave labour,” he said. “While the increase in child labour 
shows up in government household surveys, slave labour is a much more invisible 
crime.”


Related: Nestlé admits slave labour risk on Brazil coffee plantations 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/02/nestle-admits-slave-labour-risk-on-brazil-coffee-plantations>

Machado is also concerned that the Olympics could provide an opportunity for 
further exploitation. “Whenever you have one of these mega-events, there is 
always an increase in migration,” he said. “Migrants are particularly 
vulnerable to slave labour.”


Though there have been no widespread reports of abuse so far, in November last 
year 11 workers contracted to build part of the Olympics media village were 
rescued from the degrading conditions of their living quarters by an 
anti-slavery taskforce. Each received 20,000 reais (£3,500) in compensation.

Launched in 2003, Brazil’s “dirty list” named companies that had been fined 
over the previous two years for using slave labour. The companies were in 
effect blacklisted, with state-backed banks unable to offer them loans, and 
sales of their products restricted.

But in late 2014, the supreme court ordered the labour ministry to suspend 
publication of the list, following a lawsuit filed by the Associação Brasileira 
de Incorporadoras Imobiliárias (Abrainc), the real estate developer’s 
association , which represented many of the organisations on the list. Abrainc 
argued the list was “manifestly unconstitutional” due to its “disrespecting of 
the fundamental right to a defence”.

“The ‘dirty list’ was one of the strongest tools against slave labour in the 
country,” said Leonardo Sakamoto, president of the NGORepórter Brasil 
<http://reporterbrasil.org.br/>. “It allowed us to bring the private sector and 
banks into the fight against slave labour. Previously, they had said they 
wanted to help but they didn’t know how.”


In February, Repórter Brasil released the latest version of its own 
transparency list, drawn up following a freedom of information request for the 
names of the companies fined by the labour ministry for the use of slave labour 
from December 2013 to December 2015.

There are 340 companies on the list, but Sakamoto admits that it is far less 
comprehensive than the original “dirty list”. In the past, companies would only 
be removed from the list after two years if they had paid all their fines and 
changed their employment practices. The transparency list only contains the 
names of those punished in the past two years. “The big difference is that the 
new list doesn’t have the old stock of names,” he said. “Our list is smaller.”

Among the companies named in the list there are at least 18 construction 
companies, as well as cattle ranches, timber yards, farms and textile 
sweatshops.


Lojas Renner, a Brazilian high-street fashion retailer, was listed as 
employing 37 workers in conditions analogous to slavery in a sewing shop in São 
Paulo in 2014. Contacted by the Guardian, Lojas Renner said “it does not 
accept” its inclusion on the list, adding that the sewing shop in question had 
been sub-contracted by one of its suppliers, and that its suppliers had 
subsequently terminated the relationship.

Sakamoto, however, argued that such a response was a common excuse. “Under 
Brazilian legislation, you are responsible for the workers if they are working 
for you,” he said. “Outsourcing has been used as an excuse to exploit workers 
since the industrial revolution.”


Related: Migrants hope Brazil's Acre state will be gateway to a better life – 
in pictures 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2015/aug/28/acre-brazil-migrants-haiti-senegal-marcio-pimenta-in-pictures>

Another company on the list, MRV Engenharia, is one of the biggest 
housebuilding companies in Brazil.Six people were liberated from one of its 
sites in 2013 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kenrapoza/2013/01/02/brazilian-home-builder-nailed-for-slave-like-labor/#6b4f1f7c6122>
, but the company denied it had ever employed any of its workers in conditions 
analogous to slavery. The company had been previously cited five times on the 
labour ministry’s “dirty list”.

Brazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil> defines slave labour as work 
carried out in degrading conditions or in conditions that pose a risk to a 
worker’s health and/or life. Forced labour and debt bondage are also considered 
slave labour.


Since 1995, when Brazil formally acknowledged the use of slave labour in the 
economy, 50,000 people have been released from such conditions. But a bill 
being debated in the senate would significantly limit the definition of slave 
labour.

“We understand that there are concerns about what constitutes degrading 
conditions or risk to workers’ lives,” Machado said. “But we would like to work 
to clarify them rather than to see them abandoned.”


Though urban slavery has become more of a focus for the labour ministry in 
recent years, rural farms, ranches and timber yards still dominate the list.


Ilan Fonseca, a prosecutor from the ministry in the north-eastern state of 
Bahia, described the conditions he found in a raid carried out last week in a 
remote farmstead. “When we checked the area where the workers were living, we 
found there was no electricity, no fridge, no TV, no running water, no toilet 
of any kind,” he said. “They went to the toilet in the woods, their meat was 
preserved in salt and hung on a clothesline, and the tub they used for drinking 
water was full of mould and insects.”

During the raid, Fonseca and his colleagues were accompanied by a unit from 
the federal police because, he said, “in recent years, we have had many more 
death threats from farmers”.
