
It would take almost a year to go to every university and college open day in 
the country. As interested in my child’s education as I am, I have no intention 
of devoting my time to visiting all 340 of them. And nor should I.

So I was pleased when my son accepted the open day invitation to just one of 
his favoured destinations – Bath – and asked me to go along.


It was a great opportunity for him to locate the union bar and find out what 
the course entailed, while I could ask the practical questions parents find of 
interest: Is the local public transport cheap? Are there supermarkets near by? 
Does each hall of residence contain a working washing machine? (I want him to 
leave home excited and expectant, but surely not to the detriment of clean 
washing.)

Related: Should parents attend university open days? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/24/should-parents-attend-university-open-days>

I was also interested to see how we’d be received and the efforts universities 
go to to impress. It’s the little things that matter to parents. One father 
told me, “At one university we received a personalised prospectus; it makes you 
feel like a person and not a number.”

When we got there, I was possibly the only person aged over 23 and my son 
looked the other way for most of the journey to ensure damage limitation. It 
was then I realised the problem with open days – it’s hard to be cool and 
independent with your parent hanging around.

It was a working day at this campus based university, but the science 
department had flung open its doors. Parents were well catered for with cups of 
coffee and biscuits and shown the comfy seats. But within half an hour things 
had turned serious and a large group of more nervous looking parents were 
wrestling the prospectus off their student child and marking possible courses.

After coffee, the head of department calmed nerves by giving a talk with lots 
of facts and figures. Rankings seem to matter, as does a softly-softly 
approach. He trod a fine line, connecting with students, while explaining the 
finer details of fresher safety to the parents. Then it was on to a lecture 
hall with courses explained in intricate detail, including flow diagrams, 
pointer pens and plenty of stats.

To get the most from the day I discovered it’s better to be there as an 
observer, encouraging your child to talk to other students and getting them to 
ask their own questions. This is about their future and parents have to take a 
back seat. They don’t want to be embarrassed and you don’t want sore ribs – so 
deep breaths all round.

Related: A parent asks about... Ucas applications 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/30/advice-for-parents-on-ucas-deadlines-2015>

We were finally split up – students going to the biology labs and sports 
facilities and parents touring accommodation and the union. This was the chance 
for parents to ask all those awkward questions no self respecting prospective 
student would ever want to hear. Like, how does he get his mail? Can he have a 
microwave in his room? Does he have to share a shelf in the fridge?

But perhaps the truest moment of the day was when the speaker gently shrugged 
and told us an open day is invaluable for students, because “you get a chance 
to get a feel for a place. You just have to think about whether you fit in 
here”.

My gut says he’s probably right. Heading back into town, I could see my son 
quietly appreciated having me there. Away from the information overload of the 
day, it’s good to have someone who has your back.

Any parents who fail to experience an open day are probably missing a trick. 
While your son or daughter is away at university it’s going to be like having a 
second home – without the responsibilities. You can pop by a few times a year, 
enjoy the scenery and leave.

Without the open day you’d miss out on a personal fact finding mission, and 
they’d miss a shoulder to lean on.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
