
The dilemma I am struggling right now, as my husband left me and my two 
daughters for my best friend. The crazy part is that her husband committed 
suicide only three months ago. I was completely there for her and her two 
daughters. I looked more like the grieving widow than she did. It shook me to 
my core. My husband left us and swears they started seeing each other 
afterwards, but there are too many red flags that it was going on beforehand. 
Our marriage was good until she inserted herself into the middle of it. There 
are now four little girls involved, and it has taken quite a toll on my two. 
Her daughters love to tell mine what he does with them and where he takes them. 
It’s devastating!

Mariella replies “Struggling”, I presume, is an understatement. You’ve been 
betrayed by the two people you trusted most and that in itself is devastating. 
But navigating the ongoing situation is possibly even harder.

Having your kids express their sense of further injustice at their friends’ 
adventures with the father who has deserted them must be absolute emotional 
torture. You are probably feeling that the ground beneath your feet is 
unstable, everything is in flux and you have few places left to turn. Summoning 
the wherewithal to fight your way out of the dark corner you’ve been backed 
into must seem impossible and I salute you for even giving it thought. Your 
wounds may still be too fresh to allow reason a voice and a light to help steer 
your path to a better place in the near future, but since you’ve asked, let’s 
give it a go.

I wouldn’t wish them ill, but the likelihood of their relationship surviving 
is slim to say the least

First and foremost, in that surprising way life has of making fiction appear 
unimaginative, yours is a story I’ve heard before, more than once. Intense 
grief and other extreme trauma appear to create a Venus fly-trap effect, making 
the victim irresistible to certain others in often irrational ways. For the 
newly devastated or the emotionally weak such intense vulnerability provokes a 
hunger for intimacy and an urge towards obliterating any sensation, which come 
together in a seductive storm. Bereavement or near-death experience can thus 
provoke unlikely unions which may be positive and rewarding but also 
self-destructive in the extreme. Whatever the event that precipitates 
cataclysmic loss – suicide, accident, disease, or just a close encounter with 
the incredible fragility of life – new passions erupt and unpredictable bonds 
are forged in the aftermath.

Your best friend and your husband are two in a long line of lovers brought 
together in grief, and they will have a lot of guilt to live with if they do 
have a future together. I wouldn’t wish them ill but the likelihood of their 
relationship surviving, built as it is on a sunken ship, is slim to say the 
least. Whether it’s comfort sex or guilt propelling them to elevate their sly 
secret into a public relationship, what has happened between them will be 
prompted by the most basic instincts and conducted with little thought, 
particularly for those not trapped in the bubble of their impulsive physical 
union. Whether their affair began before or after her husband’s suicide, their 
relationship will forever be intimately connected to that tragic incident. 
Shrugging off that emotional load, attending to the needs of the four children 
caught in the slipstream of their affair and transcending the selfishness of 
their actions to create a relationship of worth are pretty enormous hurdles.

Sitting back and waiting for their ill-conceived coupling to fall apart isn’t 
healthy and may take too much time to assuage your current agony. You need to 
rise, serene, mature in your handling of the situation, diplomatic in your 
dealings with the children, and claim not only the moral ground that is yours 
for the taking but also the composure that comes with knowing that you are 
behaving absolutely as you should. There is relief if you can dig beyond the 
pain and scorched pride of this double betrayal by challenging yourself to 
transcend their petty, selfish, emotional quagmire and be the one who emerges 
wiser and ready to avail yourself of life’s myriad second chances. It will be 
beneficial to you and your children. And let’s not forget the other innocent 
victims – your friend’s girls who, no matter how much they enjoy your husband’s 
company, would no doubt prefer their own father back, and him back with you.

If you can dilute the understandable sense of betrayal you must be feeling, be 
magnanimous and make sure your girls get to enjoy time with their father (not 
just hearing about it second-hand). That way you can transform an awful 
situation into a bearable one. Reignite your sense of control over your own 
destiny. The certainty that you are in the right and the discomfort of the 
other two, watching you behave with the dignity and selflessness they have 
entirely failed to display, will be so much more healing and comforting than 
wallowing in your misery. They’ve had their moment. Now, whatever happens to 
their union, the future is yours for the taking.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/21/mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
