
Before I even began applying to universities in the UK, I knew I wanted to 
spend a year abroad. And I wasn’t going to let the fact that I’d chosen to 
study English literature be a hindrance to my plans.

Yet when I got to France, my choice was met with bewildered expressions from 
French and international students who couldn’t understand why I’d want to study 
English literature at Paris-Sorbonne University.

What I’ve enjoyed most about this experience is comparing the French and 
English approaches to the study of literature.

The French tend to focus on the structure of a text rather than its main 
themes. Whereas in the UK, my contact hours are mostly made up of seminars in 
which we all discuss the texts, in France we tend to have formal lectures in 
which the professors do most of the talking.

Related: How teaching English on my year abroad improved my French 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/13/how-teaching-english-on-my-year-abroad-improved-my-french>

Students <http://www.theguardian.com/education/students> in Paris seem to have 
a higher number of contact hours though, which means we spend longer looking at 
the same text than we do at Warwick University, where we often have to prepare 
a different book each week.

Kelly Brown, 21, has noticed clear differences between the way English 
literature is taught at Paris-Sorbonne and Trinity College Dublin, where she 
usually studies. “The French lean towardsformalism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formalism_(literature)> in their approach to 
texts, regardless of the language,” she says. “At home, the meaning behind a 
text is given much more significance than it is here.”

Professor Frederic Regard at Paris-Sorbonne, who has also taught literature in 
Germany and America, says: “The French system insists on textual analysis, 
which explains why the new fields taught elsewhere – such as gender studies and 
postcolonial studies – have not as yet managed to enter into our schemes.”

Dr Nick Lawrence, a year-abroad officer at the University of Warwick who 
initiated the programme for English in 2011, says: “Part of the benefit of 
studying abroad is that this comparative dimension is enhanced. Especially for 
students studying world literature, American literature, or theory, the 
academic relevance of study in another country is clear.”

Eloise Millard, 20, a student from the University of Warwick who is studying 
at Freie University in Berlin, says the approach to the teaching of literature 
has been similar at her two universities. But, in Berlin, she says “all the 
reading material is made available online so you do not have to buy anything – 
that is a huge difference”.

Related: What makes Paris the best city in the world for students? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/paris-best-city-in-the-world-for-students>

Some literature students have opted to change their focus to accommodate a 
year abroad. Warwick student Sam Mitchell, 21, is studying in China at Tsinghua 
University. He chose to switch to a language programme, which he thought would 
be more beneficial than studying English literature “in a non-English speaking 
culture that doesn’t even use the Roman alphabet”. Especially, he adds, “when 
compared to learning the incredibly useful ability of being able to speak 
Chinese.”

Studying English literature abroad offers new literary cultural experiences 
for students. Since I moved to Paris, I’ve been to readings by authors such as 
Ian McEwan, and attended a very alternative, engaging dance performance in 
preparation for a poetry class.

“The theatre offering is huge in Paris, and British authors old and new are 
often adapted for the French stage,” says Professor Regard. “I recently saw an 
excellent King Lear at the Theatre de la Madeleine, with Michel Aumont as Lear.”

The potential for new academic and cultural experiences is great and I’d 
recommend it. You might end up finding new appreciation for your course at 
home, or considering ways to incorporate foreign academic methods and cultural 
experiences into your English studies.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
