
This week, a serious column. A tribute, if you will. Days ago I heard of the 
death of a young woman named Kate Jones, who headed the London office of ICM, 
my literary agency. Her illness came upon her suddenly and she died, as I 
understand it, within days of her diagnosis. I didn't know Kate well, and 
mainly through the kind of email exchanges that constitute business 
relationships these days. She was always gracefully e-helping me out of jams 
and skilfully e-conveying my regrets. Also, she was kind enough to show me 
around when I came to the Hay Festival a few years back.

Today I find myself thinking about the nature of goodness. How is it that the 
passing of someone I barely knew has made me so sad she's gone, and so happy to 
have known her at all? She was somehow able, in the briefest exchange, to do 
something remarkable: put you at ease. She exuded a sense that all would be 
well; that you were OK just as you were; that any situation, however difficult, 
was workable; that human beings, on the whole, were worthy of interest and 
love. Kate taught me something, and is teaching me something still: our main 
job here on earth is to comfort one another; assuage fear; communicate positive 
energy, however we can.

During that Hay weekend, as we drove away from some party, I glanced over and 
the look she gave me (a smile, raised eyebrows) brought me back to the kind of 
joyous, total-immersion friendship you stop having at a certain age; where 
every topic is fair game, every joke joined. I thought, "She's England herself, 
this one - a perfect combination of goodwill, intelligence, orneriness and wit."

Later at dinner, a quiet moment: Kate beamed a gentle look at her young 
daughter, Molly, a look overflowing with the intense pride/gratitude a good 
parent feels towards her precious child; the feeling God Himself might have 
been having when He said, this is my beloved son, with whom I am well pleased.

I have been looking forward to returning to England, in part, I now realise, 
to spend time with Kate. That won't happen now. But in a sense I'll always be 
spending time with her - via, if you will, my Inner Kate: that part of me that 
aspires to be more alive, more naturally kind, a stronger source of hope for 
those I meet.

In lieu of flowers, Kate requested that contributions be sent to Marie Curie 
Cancer Care, Freepost NATW1574, Melksham, Wiltshire SN12 1BR. I've sent mine 
and hope you will, too - to honour a wonderful woman who, of course, you 
probably didn't know. If you had - trust me - you would have loved her.
