
Business is divided, political parties are divided, towns are divided, so it 
will come as no surprise that families across Britain are split down the middle 
on theEU referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, 
leading to much finger-wagging, marital huffs and frosty exchanges at breakfast 
tables.

Respondents to a Guardian survey described students arguing with their 
grandparents, spouses fuming with each other and antagonists agreeing to 
disagree and devising clever coping mechanisms to maintain the family peace.

Louise Uhl, from London, is one half of one of them. She’s a “passionate 
Brexiter”, while her partner believes very strongly that Britain should remain.

“It’s perhaps odd that we should disagree on this because we have almost 
identical educational and professional backgrounds,” said Uhl. “We have lengthy 
debates almost daily about the issue and, while we can both understand the 
other person’s viewpoint, I think we both find it incredibly frustrating that 
the other person won’t budge.

“We both definitely intend to vote which means, sadly, that our votes will 
cancel each other out.”
 ‘My fiancee wears a Vote Leave badge on her coat.’ Photograph: Alan Davies 
Also at loggerheads are Alan Davies, from Aberaeron in Wales, and his fiancee.

“She wears a Vote Leave badge on her coat. We are very much at polar opposites 
in our views and we have the kind of discussions that you know will only end in 
stalemate,” he said. “Will we get on after the vote? Oh, yes. Always.”

Callum McDonald, a student from Essex, says: “My mum has put in place an 
unofficial ban on talking about the EU or even national politics, anything 
above local complaints have become taboo subjects. This hasn’t stopped my 
grandparents trying to sneak it into conversations.


“As an extended family we are either firmly or begrudgingly in the remain 
camp. One thing we all agree on is the need to vote, especially for young 
people.”

Bans on talking about the issue – official or unofficial – seem to be a 
popular way of keeping family relations civil. But some of our readers were 
unsure how they would be able to reunite after the vote, particularly in the 
event of a leave win.

“My dad is very much in favour of Brexit, despite the fact that I live in 
Sweden working as a researcher at a university and very much rely on the EU for 
the right to work here, healthcare, and for a lot of the funding which helps 
employ me and my colleagues,” said Louise Howes, whose parents live in 
Lincolnshire.


“If we leave, I am not sure how well I will cope with my feeling of resentment 
towards him.”

Paul Taylor, from Oldham, said: “My son and daughter are voting leave and I am 
voting remain, which has resulted in our eating at separate times and passing 
without speaking.”

One reader on the south coast, who wishes to remain anonymous, faces the 
unusual situation of being an EU citizen living in the UK – but whose husband 
is voting for Brexit. “I’m a Corsican lady married to a British man for over 10 
years. He’s voting out, as are his entire family,” she said. “I see the whole 
thing as a betrayal.”

For some, that traditional British coping strategy – irreverent humour – might 
be the best way to get through what is certain to be a difficult few weeks.

One 36-year-old council worker from Nottingham emailed in frustration after 
another evening with his family turned to debating Brexit. He is firmly in the 
remain camp; his retired father will be voting leave.


“His argument was, ‘We were all right for 900 years before the EU,” wrote our 
reader. “Nine hundred years including near-constant war, serfdom, slavery, 
child labour, no women’s rights, precious few rights for anyone else and people 
dying at 30 – good argument, Dad.

“It was only after I’d gone that I got to thinking about why he kept talking 
about 900 years and I realised that his starting point for Britain being ‘all 
right on its own’ was the country being conquered by the French.”
