
In 1950, during a banned May Day workers’ march, a heavily pregnant young 
woman climbed out of a police van, declaring she was about to give birth and 
should go to the hospital, not the police station. My mother, Shirley Hearn, 
who has died aged 89, was no stranger to protest.

All through her life, whether politically aligned or not, she had something to 
say about the state of the world. A socialist and feminist, with a green heart 
and a keen sense of justice, she interested herself in education, believing 
this to be key to creating a better world.

She was the only child of a Cornish professional singer, John Anstey, and 
Jessie (nee Ketley), a legal secretary. John died of septicaemia in 1932. 
Jessie then married Jack Farrell and had a second daughter, Elizabeth, born in 
1934.

A clever and musical child, Shirley was educated at Mary Datchelor school in 
Camberwell, south London, and during the second world war, in Llanelli, south 
Wales, where the school was evacuated. She began training as a nurse at St 
Mary’s hospital, Paddington, in 1945.

Her nursing experience fuelled her ambition to become a doctor. She attended 
evening classes to gain qualifications for medical school. However, she was 
diverted from this course when she met my father, Leonard, at one of the 
evening classes, married him and began a family.

As soon as we four children were at school, she began training as a teacher. 
Working full-time as a biology teacher, she began a science degree with the 
Open University in the 1970s, completing it in the early 1980s. She taught for 
many years from around 1972 until her retirement in the late 1980s at Wilson’s 
school in Sutton, south London, where pupils recall her being inspiring and 
entertaining.

Shirley railed against gender role restrictions as she saw them in her own 
career and was determined that I, as a then partially sighted girl, should have 
the same opportunities as my sighted brothers. When I became blind, she urged 
me not to be restricted by others’ negative attitudes, encouraging me to find 
rational and creative ways to remove societal barriers, a discipline she was to 
apply to her own life in her frailer years.

In retirement, she bent her scientific mind to becoming semi self-sufficient 
ecologically. She didn’t have a lawn: she had solar panels. She embodied 
life-long learning, taking up fused-glasswork in her 80s. Applying her 
chemist’s mind to the task of creating different colours in glass, she produced 
elegant abstract pieces.

When I became a Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> politician 
in May 2014, elected a councillor in Haringey, north London, she would ring me 
up regularly with important policy ideas for me to pass to the leader. A true 
Corbynista, she believed that Jeremy Corbyn would bring about a better world. 
Typically, our last conversation, 10 days before she died, was on preventing 
climate change through socialist house-building policies.

She is survived by her sons, Leslie (who was almost born in custody), Nigel, 
my twin, Lindsay, and me.
