
England’s free schools received 60% more funding per pupil than local 
authority primaries and secondaries in the latest financial year, new analysis 
by Education Guardian shows.

The average amount of state funding given to free schools in 2013-14 is 
£7,761, compared with a national figure for local authority schools of £4,767, 
according toDepartment for Education data 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/income-and-expenditure-in-academies-in-england-2013-to-2014>
 released last month. DfE statistics on academy spending (free schools are a 
type of academy) includes data for 54 mainstream free schools, set up in the 
first two years of the scheme. A quarter are documented as receiving at least 
£10,000 per pupil in 2013-14, compared with national averages for conventional 
state schools of £5,817 among all secondaries and £4,402 among primaries.

Free schools <http://www.theguardian.com/education/free-schools> towards the 
top of the funding rankings often have only small numbers of pupils. St Andrew 
the Apostle Greek Orthodox school, in Barnet, north London, received the most: 
£18,507 for each of its 73 pupils, making £1.4m in total.

Second was Pimlico primary, in Westminster – part of the Future academy chain, 
run by academies minister Lord Nash and his wife Caroline – with £17,615 for 
each of its 26 pupils, or £458,000 in total.

Across all academies with more than 100 pupils, the top-funded school was Ark 
All Saints academy, in Southwark, south London, on £19,420 per pupil from the 
state.

On its website the DfE describes these data tables as “experimental” and they 
are not all-encompassing: there is no information, for example, published about 
schools within two major academy chains: the Harris Federation and the David 
Ross trust.

The DfE was invited to respond, but had not done so at the time of Education 
Guardian going to press.

Education consultants swallow fifth of income

Also intriguing in the academy spending data was the Coventry-based Erudition 
Schools <http://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Trust’s spend on 
education consultants, cited as nearly 20% of its entire income.


Both DfE data and Erudition’s accounts show a £277,000 spend on educational 
consultants in 2013-14, out of a total income of £1.4m for its two schools. A 
large proportion of this was earmarked that year for the American for-profit 
company K12, which sells online curriculum resources and education services. 
The company, founded by a former Erudition trustee, Ronald Packard, is listed 
on the school’s website as its “partner”. An Erudition spokeswoman tells us 
this has involved K12 providing curriculum materials as well as some investment 
in the schools.

In a statement, Erudition told us £133,000 of this had been invoiced by K12’s 
UK arm for education consultancy for a failed bid to set up a free school. A 
further £18,000 was invoiced to Erudition by K12 UK for education and 
consultancy fees, but the money was never paid as the invoices were later 
cancelled.

Alan Windram, head of finance for Erudition, said K12 had been happy to write 
off the fees as part of its “investment into the UK [education] market”. We 
read this as suggesting the company might like to see its resources more widely 
sold.

Karen Mackay, Erudition’s managing director, says in the statement: “Neither 
[Erudition Schools Trust or K12] have profited as a trust or as a company from 
these schools and our primary purpose will always be to improve children’s 
welfare and success.”

Sedgehill celebrates success despite exodus

Bittersweet news arrives from one of south London’s largest comprehensives, 
where results at both GCSE and A-level have risen, despite an exodus of staff 
at the end of a tumultuous academic year.

Some 45 staff left Sedgehill school at the end of last term, a well-placed 
source tells us, along with two deputy heads and two assistant heads, following 
closely behindheadteacher Ken Mackenzie, who left in April 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/apr/28/tory-manifesto-schools-dont-add-up>
.

The school’s future was thrown into doubt last autumn when Lewisham council 
sacked governors and tried to force it into a partnership with Bethnal Green 
academy in east London, citing poor results. That plan was scrapped after 
Bethnal Green withdrew in the face of an 1,800-signature petition against it.

Mackenzie resigned three months after Lewisham sought to push ahead anyway 
with plans for management change by installing a new chief executive, Julia 
Scannell, above him.

Two weeks ago, the school celebrated improved A-level results as “very 
pleasing” (we understand the A*-B rate rose from 34.4% to 36%), while its 
headline GCSE scores, released last week, rose by 10 percentage points to a new 
record of 54%. Our source, a former staff member, says: “These [improving] 
figures show that nothing should have been done at our school.”

Scannell has not commented on staff departures at the school. She did, 
however, say: “We are really pleased that the school achieved its best ever 
GCSE results, from 2014’s very low base. The school is fully and appropriately 
staffed for September 2015 and we are looking forward to continuing a journey 
of swift and significant improvement.”

Asbestos campaigner finally calls it a day

And finally, a widely respected campaigner on the issue of asbestos in 
classrooms 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/19/schools-asbestos-buildings-unable-get-rid>
 is retiring.


Related: Schools are facing an asbestos timebomb 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/19/schools-asbestos-buildings-unable-get-rid>

Michael Lees campaigned tirelessly to highlight the risks of asbestos in 
schools, after the death of his wife, Gina, a former nursery teacher, who died 
at the age of 51 of mesothelioma.

Lees, who ran the Asbestos in Schools 
<http://www.asbestosexposureschools.co.uk/> website, brought together teaching 
unions to lobby parliament on the issue and was heavily involved in the 
successful push to get ministers to publish a review on asbestos in schools 
before the general election. He was awarded an MBE for his work last year.

A union source said: “Many in the anti-asbestos movement are extremely sad 
that he’s finally decided to call it a day.” We wish him well.

• This article was amended on 25 August 2015. An earlier version said it was 
understood that at Sedgehill school the A*-C rate for A-levels rose from 34.4% 
to 36%. Those figures were for A*-B. The article was further amended on 27 
August 2015 to correct a quote from Julia Scannell. An earlier version 
misquoted her as saying “The academy is fully and appropriately staffed…”.
