
What does this fascinator say about me?

“It says I’m a sensual being. I’m the sort of girl who likes to be taken out 
for nice meals, and wined and dined.”

And what it really says 

Red roses are the most dramatic of flowers; their scent is strong, their 
petals like velvet, their colour speaks of love and blood and death. To 
decorate yourself with red roses is wildly romantic. And on this fascinator, 
made by Bink herself, the roses are vast, piled upon each other. The romance is 
overwhelming. They are too much.

Except that on Bink they are not too much at all. The flowers seem all a part 
of her, as though they grew from her hair, as if she’s a fairytale character, 
the spirit of the red rose. Look at her! She is a rose: astonishingly sexy, 
with her black hair, pale skin, red lips, gorgeous face and beautiful figure. 
Ava Gardner and Elizabeth Taylor combined. You could gaze at her for days.

The detail and precision in Bink’s fascinator, as well as its beauty, show 
that she cares about her artistry, spends time getting her creations as perfect 
as they can be. It sets a standard. You couldn’t turn up to take Bink out in 
your old puffa and dog-walking trainers. For such a remarkable vision of 
womanhood, you would need to make a proper effort, from your shoes to the hair 
on your head. Or, preferably, the wondrous hat atop your hair.

Bink’s stance in front of the camera, her gaze, shows that she knows herself 
and likes who she is. The effort that she puts into her appearance could make 
you think she’s vain, but it seems more like giving to me. She’s giving 
something to those who witness her: a beautiful dream of a more wonderful 
world. I have no time for Valentine’s Day, but Bink shows that romance is far 
from dead. You need a belief in romance to create such a fabulous fascinator. 
And by fabulous fascinator, I mean Bink, not her headwear.


Visit pearlsandswine.com <http://www.pearlsandswine.com/> for more of Bink’s 
designs


If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
