
The first three television debates had only raised the possibility that the 
best way to win theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> could be to say absolutely 
nothing. Since the only person who had admitted to having her mind changed by 
anything anyone had said in the campaign was Tory MP Dr Sarah Wollaston, who 
switched from leave to remain on Wednesday, silence might have been the best 
strategy.

The first side to announce that it had already said everything that needed to 
be said hundreds of times over and was no longer going to insult the electorate 
by battering them with the same old lies and half-truths could possibly hoover 
up the 15% or so of voters who are still undecided.

Then came Nicola Sturgeon <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>
, Angela Eagle and Amber Rudd up against Boris Johnson in the second ITV 
debate. It was meant to be three v three but Andrea Leadsom and Gisela Stuart 
were like the tracks on Now That’s What I Call Music that were only there to 
fill some space and nobody ever listens to. Leadsom looked terrified and out of 
her depth, while Stuart is so dull and self-effacing she could lose an argument 
against herself.

The debate got under way with each of the six making a one-minute sales pitch 
and it briefly threatened to be more of the same old, same old that had 
characterised the earlier one-man shows of David Cameron and Michael Gove, and 
theDave-and-Nigel two-hander 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/farage-calls-migrant-sex-attack-comments-tiddly-issue-in-eu-referendum-campaign>
. Dull and entirely predictable. But once the opening formalities were done, 
the gloves came off and it was immediately clear that Nicola, Angela and Amber 
were working as a team to take down Boris. No chance was missed to make it 
personal.

The first question was on immigration and Amber rushed out of the blocks to 
play the man not the ball. “The only number Boris is interested in is Number 
10,” she declared to a round of applause. Nicola and Angela were quick to 
follow up, taking Boris down at every opportunity. The £350m figure on the Vote 
Leave Bus was nothing but a whopping lie. “Take it down,” Nicola said. “Get 
that lie off the bus,” Angela joined in.

Boris didn’t quite know how to respond. He wanted to go on the attack but 
sensed he was never going to beat the odds. His usual tactic of last resort is 
to play it for gags, but now wasn’t the time against three powerful women. 
Instead he tried to play the statesman and merely looked for different ways of 
saying “take back control”.

Sensing that her man was struggling against a determined pincer movement, 
Gisela tried to help out. “I don’t think we should worry that none of the 
experts agree with the leave campaign,” she said. “Every British person can be 
their own expert.” Boris’s eyes turned a shade redder and puffier. With friends 
like these … With Gisela at the helm everyone can be their own brain surgeon.

The longer it went on the more exhausting and febrile it became. Everyone 
would probably have been better off cutting and running after an hour, rather 
than dragging it out for two. What had started as robust debate had ended in a 
stalemate of personal insults, appeals to motherhood – Boris wisely kept his 
counsel on this one – and competing scaremongering. The biggest cheer of the 
night went to the final questioner, who asked: “Why should we trust any of 
you?” No one really had a satisfactory answer. The remainers might have the 
better arguments but maybe silence really is the best way to win the referendum.
