
Universities are under pressure to be efficient and effective, and are 
constantly measured and compared on these qualities. But universities also 
generate prestige – and that makes itself apparent in more subtle ways.

Quite a lot of university activity is prestige-seeking and there can be a 
tension between activity that gains prestige for the institution and activity 
that is cost-effective and efficient.

Prestige differs from reputation in the following ways: 
• only a few can have prestige;
• it is hard, often impossible, to measure; 
• it tends to be awarded by insiders (in this case academics); 
• it takes longer to gain and longer to lose than reputation.

Related: What’s worse than a Ref for teaching? An Ofsted for universities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jul/13/whats-worse-than-a-ref-for-teaching-an-ofsted-for-universities>

For example, a Nobel prize confers prestige, while good graduate employment 
statistics generate reputation.

As part of my research for the Leadership Foundation for Higher Education, I 
interviewed 20 heads of UK higher education institutions to discuss the role of 
prestige in their work, their institutions, and in the sector beyond.

We found that institutions tend to fall into one of three categories:
• Prestige-seeking (tended to be older, research-intensive universities)
• Reputation-seeking (tended to be newer, teaching-led universities)
• A combination

“I am very comfortable with the term [prestige]. It is articulated in a number 
of ways in my institution. It means you don’t have to explain yourself.”
Pre-92 head

“I am not trying even for excellence. I am trying for fairness and competence 
at a good price. We teach to the price, but this is not something that is easy 
to say in the UK. We have average students, and that is what they need.”
Post-92 head

Academic credibility matters

Most heads believe that academic credibility is still essential, although it 
does not have to be entirely current.


“My personal prestige was derived from success over 20 years. If someone 
questioned me I could say that this is what I have done over the last four big 
research assessments.
Pre-92 head

Institutions can contain tribalism

Effective management requires a balanced approach, seen in this description of 
a merged institution.

“There is distinct tribalism, and this is in many ways good. What you also 
need are shared values. Each of the colleges can and should have its 
distinctive mission.

“It is a difficult balance to strike, because you have to project the 
university and at the same time encourage the constituent parts to have their 
individual identity.”
Post-92 head

Research carries the most cachet

Research is always valued more highly than teaching, in both pre- and post-92 
institutions. And research assessment can damage teaching staff morale.

“You have to work on this all the time. If you take your foot off at all, or 
disengage your mouth, academics will disappear back into the cupboards.”
Post-92 head 

“I like to reassure staff that if they are not returned, it is not a mark of 
failure.”
Post-92 head 

Everyone is obsessed with the Russell Group

Related: Top universities battling for students | Anna Fazackerley 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/30/russell-group-competition-for-top-students-numbers-limit>

There is both admiration for, and frustration with, the dominance of the 
Russell Group of research-intensive universities.

“The Russell Group has successfully stage-managed the position that it is seen 
as comprising the best universities. Some are and some aren’t, but by and large 
this is nonsense.

“However, parents increasingly say they want their child to go to one.”
Pre-92 head

League tables are crucial but challenging

League tables and rankings increase competitiveness and decrease the 
likelihood that institutions will collaborate.

Some league tables disadvantage teaching-led institutions by recording 
achievements that are not relevant to their institution’s mission.

Regional collaboration is difficultfor post-92 institutions

“We work very hard at selling ourselves to local councils and regional 
enterprise bodies. Our council would far rather work with a research-led 
institution in the area. It is purely a matter of prestige.”
Post-92 head 

The interviews reveal a paradox. On the one hand, efficiency and effectiveness 
require collaboration between institutions and beyond them. On the other, 
increasing competition encourages the active pursuit of prestige in ways that 
may discourage cooperation and entrench perceived status differences.

Considering universities as prestige economies can be a powerful way of 
understanding organisational behaviour. This could be a fruitful field for 
further research, which may itself raise awareness and lead to the review of 
practice in institutions.


If the government wants universities to be more efficient and effective, it 
needs to understand human motivation better – and specifically how prestige 
works. What happens when the demand for global players in the world knowledge 
economy meets the need to support access to white working class boys and the 
reduction of drop-out rates for black students? What happens when the 
glittering prizes of research excellence are set alongside the need to teach 
students well?


The research report will be available from the Leadership Foundation’s website 
<http://www.lfhe.ac.uk/> after a seminar on Tuesday 5 April, at King’s College 
London.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com


