
Despite the UK’s pivotal role on the global stage and its melting pot of 
cultures, the country remains largely a nation of monoglots. But what is 
holding back Brits from learning a foreign language?

The Guardian and the British Academy launched the Case for Language Learning 
to investigate the reasons behind the UK’s shortage of foreign language skills, 
discussing the importance and value of learning a foreign tongue. TheLiving 
Languages report 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1428923743291/BritAcFINAL_living_language.pdf>
highlights many of the debates and thinking generated by the two-year project, 
and brings together some of the dominant themes.
 You can find the full report here 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1428923743291/BritAcFINAL_living_language.pdf> 
(best viewed in Adobe reader). 
Here are seven of the key findings:


1. Lack of language skills is bad for the economy

Britain’s economy is being seriously harmed because of a shortage of foreign 
language skills. In fact, according to the government’s own statistics, it 
costs the country 3.5% of GDP every year - that’s £48bn. James Foreman-Peck, 
professor of economics at Cardiff Business School described this as a “tax on 
growth”, which sees the potential of small to medium-size exporters being 
hampered. This happens not just because they don’t have the cash to employ lots 
of linguists like global companies do, but also because - without language 
skills - they are deterred from trading internationally.

One business leader, Nick Brown, explained: “English is fine if you want to 
buy things, but it’s not the right language to use for people who want to sell 
things.”

2. Young people are put off language learning

Research by the Guardian and British Academy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/07/-sp-do-young-people-care-about-learning-foreign-languages-data>
 found that young people are put off learning languages because they think it 
is too difficult. And that’s despite the fact most of them acknowledge that 
languages can be good for careers, understanding cultures and meeting new 
people.

The number of students taking A-levels in foreign languages has been in steady 
decline in England for 10 years, and the number of undergraduates accepted for 
a degree in a modern language fell to its lowest level in a decade in 2012-13.

It’s not all bad news though, 70% said they would be interested in learning a 
language in the future, and one in five already speak another language at home 
with their family. The number taking language GCSEs has also begun to recover.

3. Languages <http://www.theguardian.com/education/languages> are about more 
than boosting your CV

The Case for Language Learning heard from dozens of readers and experts who 
cited a range of problems with the way languages are approached in schools. One 
of the most striking themes was the importance of recognising that languages 
must be about more than providing a career boost. After all, Jack Porteous, of 
UK Trade and Investment, said that language skills are “rarely the main 
requirement” for a job – there’s usually more to it. So it’s important to 
remember the other aspects of language learning as well.

Professor Katrin Kohl of the University of Oxford said: “Learning a language 
is not only tough but may be dull unless it involves intellectual challenges, 
cultural attractions and communicative rewards.”

4. Minority languages have a complex relationship with communities


Do multiple foreign languages bind communities or divide them? It seems the 
jury is still out. One reader said: “I am speaking as [a member of] a non-white 
minority, born in this country. Speaking 300 languages in the country is not a 
good thing. It creates division and hostility.”

However, Jocelyn Wyburd, chair of the University Council of Modern Languages, 
said: “If we can harness the multilingualism in our presence … that could be 
massively beneficial in schools and benefit cross-cultural communication.” 
Despite this, a Guardian/ICM poll suggests minority languages are not being 
fully embraced, with only around a third of people whose native language isn’t 
English take a qualification in their mother tongue.

5. 6,000 languages are facing extinction

Across the globe, minority languages are facing extinction in the face of 
globalisation. According to Unesco,half the world’s 6,000 languages 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/endangered-languages/> face being 
wiped out by the end of the century, including 150 from Europe.

The endangered languages include Quechua, which is spoken, primarily in the 
Andes in Colombia to Chile. Prof Rosaleen Howard, of Newcastle University 
explained: “When people move from rural areas to the cities they need Spanish 
in order to get jobs and education; there is no alternative. The people who 
push for language revitalisation tend to be the more educated people who are 
bilingual.”

6. Technology is a good match for languages

Technology is quickly becoming an important tool, not only to help facilitate 
language learning, but also to stoke interest and engagement. From blogging to 
video conferences and a range of apps, technology offers a fresh approach to 
the way languages are taught.

Consultant and former language teacher Joe Dale explained how one social media 
group had become an invaluable test-bed for ideas on using new technologies. He 
said: “Over time, the group has developed a strong ethos of sharing innovative 
classroom practice, encouraging each other to experiment and feed back their 
findings for further discussion and reflection.”

7. Learning languages is an enriching experience


Above all else, learning a language is something that can open your mind and 
allow you to see the world in new and exciting ways. One blogger who suffers 
from depression wrote: “Languages provide a window on to a wider world … 
allowing me to connect with people and by giving me a route back to the things 
I feel are important.”

Indeed, the rich tapestry of languages is intertwined with our own identity 
and the fabric of society. Ellie Mae O’Hagan suggests: “Perhaps the fact that 
languages are embodied with so much culture and history is why it feels so 
poignant to forget them, and so painful.”


To explore the issues discussed here and the Case for Language Learning 
project in more detail, here’s ourfull report 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/ni/1428923743291/BritAcFINAL_living_language.pdf>.
