 'It's a basic human need,' said Henshaw. 'People need to stick up for 
something. Why do you think football is so popular? You see, it's still okay, 
up to a point, to stick up for a football team, whereas the idea of sticking up 
for class, country, race, creed, sex, age, or species has rightfully been 
discredited. The problem is that you and I don't like football. Which is why we 
sit here, day after day, with vacant expressions on our faces. With no cause to 
defend, we're spiritually dispossessed, alienated from history, flawed as 
people.'
 I disagreed. It seemed to me that finding something to stick up for was 
merely a process of elimination. Okay, it's narrow-minded and shabby to stick 
up for country, creed, species, and so on, but broaden your horizons and what 
do you find? Fundamental biology. There are 12 ways to make life-forms based on 
carbon, and eight based on silicon. There are also 127 ways of making 
life-forms based on elements and compounds that don't occur in this universe, 
so we won't go into those. Of the 12 carbon-based life-forms, four are built 
from a chemical called ANA. They have a life- span measured in nanoseconds and 
are unable to reproduce. They crop up from time to time, mostly in garages. 
They tell you they'll have your car fixed by Wednesday and then die, leaving no 
relatives.

 If you ever get the car back, there'll be black slime on the steering wheel. 
This is the 'corpse'.

 Another four of the carbon-based life-forms - the ones constructed from BNA - 
have never mastered the knack of mortality. They live forever, mostly around 
volcanic outlets deep beneath the sea, but some of them have confectionery 
shops in Nuneaton. You go into one for a box of Orange Matchmakers. They take 
ages serving you, just as if they've got all the time in the world, which, of 
course, they have. The good thing is you can prod them and they don't mind. 
Apprentice slaughterhouse workers sometimes use them for practice.

 Another three of the carbon-based life-forms - the CNA ones - have a dietary 
problem. Their digestive systems can only work with food groups that have not 
yet been invented. All the foodstuffs on which other life-forms dine - krill, 
peas, sunlight, toast - are poison to them.

 One day, the nourishment they need will be devised, probably by accident, and 
they'll take over the Earth, which will be a pity because they look like bacon 
and act strict. Until then, they go from peckish to starving in no time at all.

 Which leaves us with the DNA carbon-based life-forms - the group to which we 
belong. It is an admirable life-form, capable of reproduction, mutation and 
mortality - just the kind of qualities you need in a life-form. Some of the 
silicon-based life-forms scoff at the very idea of mutation, claiming it often 
results in silliness. 'Look at the beech tree!' they sneer. 'Look at the pug!' 
In response to which all a carbon-based life-form has to do is remove a bone or 
twig, char it, draw pictures with the result, and say, 'Can you do that?' It 
shuts silicon-based life-forms up damned fast, I can tell you - the old 
melty-bones.

 'You've encountered silicon-based life-forms, then, have you?' asked Henshaw.

 'No,' I replied. 'I was merely indulging in conjecture. Luckily, we don't see 
many silicon- based life-forms on this planet, and people who do see them 
usually have beards and live in caravans, because the Government won't fund 
proper institutions, so I don't think we've much to worry about.' 'So you 
reckon it'd be okay to stick up for DNA-style carbon-based life-forms?' 'Until 
an oppressed minority of other life-forms happens along, yes, I do.' The 
following day, Henshaw had a couple of T-shirts printed with our new battlecry.

 'DNA-Style Carbon-Based Life-Forms Are Pretty Much Okay.' We spent most of 
Tuesday looking at the skies, hoping to find something to kick the shit out of.
