
It was a brusque encounter and lasted barely 15 seconds at the gates of 
Downing Street on an early autumn evening in September 2012.

But the Plebgate incident spiralled into a two-year battle for Andrew Mitchell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell> and his tightknit family 
– and all but destroyed his chances of a return to a career on the political 
frontline.

Looking crestfallen, as he stood on the steps of the high court flanked by his 
wife Sharon and his daughter, the former cabinet minister signalled that he is 
admitting defeat.

Mitchell, who faces a legal bill running into millions of pounds – up to £3m 
according to some reports – said: “Obviously I am bitterly disappointed by the 
result of the judgment. This has been a miserable two years. But we now need to 
bring this matter to a close and to move on with our lives.”

Mitchell’s remarks suggest that he accepts he has no future on the political 
frontline under the leadership of David Cameron. But friends say that he is 
keen to stand again in his Sutton Coldfield constituency at the next election 
as senior allies, led by the chairman of the commons foreign affairs select 
committee Sir Richard Ottaway, voiced support for Mitchell.

Ottaway told Channel Four News: “Andrew has been through hell and back. Mr 
Rowland has been through hell and back. It is a tragedy for Andrew Mitchell and 
his wife. I think he should be allowed to get on with his life.”

The verdict by Mr Justice Mitting – and Mitchell’s speedy response – brings to 
an end a two-year campaign that was launched when friends say they invoked the 
memory of Margaret Thatcher to persuade him to come out fighting after he lost 
his job as chief whip. Imagine the regrets you would feel, they said, if you 
did not at least try to stage a fight – echoing the advice of Denis Thatcher to 
his wife in 1975, which helped persuade the future prime minister to contest 
the Tory leadership.

The advice was delivered during lengthy discussions with friends, family and 
parliamentary colleagues, and emboldened Mitchell to launch an aggressive 
campaign – played out in the media, then the courts – to clear his name with 
the help of his mentor, former shadow home secretary David Davis.

Mitchell was forced to resign because he did not retain the confidence of the 
new generation of Conservative MPs and after a raw calculation in No 10 that 
the word of a police officer could not be challenged. He admitted swearing in 
the presence of PC Toby Rowland but insisted he had not said “pleb”.

In ruling that he had said it, the judge pointed out just how “politically 
toxic” the word is.

In defeat, Mitchell might still try to claim some successes in the campaign. 
Police officers were disciplined and one, who falsely claimed to have witnessed 
the encounter between Mitchell and Rowland in September 2012, was jailed. David 
Cameron even called last year for members of thePolice 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation, who gave a false account of 
a subsequent meeting with Mitchell, to apologise.

Mitchell called high-profile character witnesses including Sebastian Coe and 
Bob Geldof. The singer told the court his friend was “no slouch” as a swearer 
but would never use the word pleb.

But the MP’s campaign to restore his reputation has now ended in spectacular 
failure and humiliation. Mitchell was described by the judge as “childish” and 
inconsistent in his story.

He is also left with a legal bill running into millions, after Mitting chose 
to believe the word of Rowland over him.

Outside the court, Rowland said: “It is with huge regret that what happened at 
the gates of Downing Street more than two years ago has ended up here. It 
should be pointed out that I and my team tried everything possible to stop the 
need for court action. The pain me and my family have been through is 
indescribable and it is particularly saddening that all this happened because I 
was following procedure and simply doing my job without fear or favour.

“I also recognise how difficult it must have been for Mr Mitchell’s family and 
I hope now that a line can be drawn and everyone can be left in peace.”

Mitchell will have to face an immediate financial challenge. In May this year 
it was reported that he was making plans to sell his north London home to help 
pay his legal bills.

In the future the Mitchell camp may wonder whether it was wise to launch a 
scorched earth campaign to try to obliterate everyone who questioned his 
account of the incident. Mitchell and Davis believed they faced such a 
concerted campaign from the police – whose word is only ever questioned by the 
most foolhardy of politicians – that they had no choice but to undermine each 
and every one of them.

The biggest mistake Mitchell made in his concerted and connected campaign to 
clear his name was at the very point that it looked as if he was moving closer 
to his goal.

In December 2012 Channel 4 Dispatches broadcast footage of the incident which 
appeared to question the account of some of officers. Opinion shifted 
dramatically in Mitchell’s favour after the film.

But Mitchell followed the Channel 4 programme with a lengthy Sunday Times 
article in which he gave a highly detailed account of the incident.

This article came back to bite Mitchell during his libel trial when Sir John 
Randall, his former deputy in the whips’ office, said he found the account 
“rather extraordinary” because Mitchell had told him he could not recall what 
he said five days after the incident.

Mitchell is likely to repair to his house in Nottinghamshire to contemplate 
his future. He appears to have accepted that this will be a life beyond the 
political frontline, possibly in the world of international development where 
he built his reputation over nearly a decade as secretary of state and shadow 
secretary of state.

• This article was amended on 28 November 2014 because Channel 4 Dispatches 
broadcast footage of the incident in December 2012, not 2014 as an earlier 
version said.

