
“Firefighters are firefighters all over the world. That fraternity will always 
be there,” says Jim Malone, retired firefighter and member of the Scottish 
branch of the Fire Brigades Union (FBU). It’s a brotherhood and sisterhood, 
Malone says, that surpasses conflict over race, religion and physical 
boundaries.

And Malone should know. He’s the Scottish coordinator of the FBU’s Palestinian 
support team, which helps train firefighters in the Palestinian civil defence – 
emergency services that serve most of the West Bank - and those in east 
Jerusalem, Nablus and Hebron.

The Scottish FBU officially linked up with Nablus in 1982 and has supported 
firefighters there with donations of equipment ever since.Firefighters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/firefighters> from the Palestinian civil defence 
have travelled to Scotland for training and firefighters from Scotland 
regularly travel to Nablus to carry out training. Malone has just returned from 
the West Bank from his most recent trip there as part of his humanitarian work 
with the FBU.

Between 1 October and 30 November this year, 103 Palestinians and 17 Israelis 
were killed <http://www.ochaopt.org/poc24november-30november-2015.aspx> and 
hundreds more injured, according to the UN Office for the Coordination of 
Humanitarian Affairs. These statistics make it hard to imagine any fraternity 
between Israeli and Palestinian firefighters, but Malone is adamant that they 
work together when necessary and that there is sincere respect on both sides.

Israeli firefighters, he says, have been impressed by the professionalism and 
dedication of the Palestinian firefighters. In 2010, Palestinian firefighters 
were praised after assisting the effort to battle adevastating fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2010/dec/03/israel-forest-fires> in 
Israel’s Carmel mountains, which killed 43 Israelis. It was seen as an act of 
solidarity, where humanitarianism knows no borders.

If you have to wait hours, you won't save anyone. They do the best with what 
they have, but their plight is desperate
Jim Malone 
Fire departments are severely affected by the difficult conditions in the West 
Bank and Gaza. In Hebron, a volatile city in the West Bank home to a holy site 
where1,000 Jewish settlers live among a Palestinian population of 200,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/hebron-west-bank-troubled-city-palestine-israel>
, the city’s 35 firefighters have no structural kit, no helmets, fire gloves or 
fire boots. Malone, who visited the station in Hebron in October , said he 
found the situation dangerous and unacceptable. “They’re denied the basics,” he 
says.

When the Hebron municipality asked the Scottish FBU for assistance, it stated 
that firefighters are unable to attend an average of two out of nine fires. In 
February this year, three children lost their lives in a house fire caused by a 
faulty heater. Firefighters arrived at their home in Hebron, but without a 
hydraulic ladder or suitable kit, they were unable to tackle the flames or gain 
external access to the fourth floor flat. The Hebron municipality believes 
lives could have been saved if its fire service had the proper equipment.

Malone says the checkpoints dotted around the West Bank and the wall 
separating the Israeli state andPalestinian territories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/palestinian-territories> cause delays in 
response times for emergency services. These restrictions on movement have 
increasingly become a source of tension and violence, even for the emergency 
services.

One firefighter was shot in the shoulder while driving a fire engine past a 
checkpoint, according to Malone. “Firefighters will try not to expose 
themselves. But at the same time they’ll turn up to any incident they’re called 
to,” he says. “They’re not going to discriminate between human beings if they 
need the help of the fire brigade,” he says.

But it is often very difficult for the firefighters to move around. “They just 
do the best with what they have. But their plight is desperate,” says Malone. 
“If there’s a fire in the village and you have to wait several hours to get 
through, you’re not going to save anyone.”
 A fire engine donated to the Palestinian civil defence in Nablus, West Bank 
by the FBU. Photograph: Jim Malone 
In 2011 the FBU raised money to buy two fire engines and drive them 2,500 
miles to the West Bank to donate to the fire service in Nablus. Unfortunately 
one broke down on the way, but the other made it to the city and is still being 
used today.



Despite donations, there is still a shortage of equipment. For water rescue 
missions in an area prone tosevere flooding 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/inpictures/2015/01/palestine-copes-with-deep-free-2015111121442509370.html>
 and extreme weather conditions, the Palestinian firefighters are having to 
usethe kind of dinghies you would buy for a holiday in Spain. “It’s frustrating 
that the Palestinians are unable to carry out their jobs better because their 
kit and equipment is such poor quality,” says Malone.


UK firefighters have vital breathing apparatus sets, for example, but in 
Hebron the firefighters have basic masks to keep the smoke out. “They just put 
the mask on, and they’ll go in the fire and try to get as close as they can,” 
says Malone.

International support has funded the purchase of some better quality equipment 
and with support from the FBU, the Scottish fire service and politicians, 
firefighters from the Palestinian civil defence have received training in 
firefighting, water rescue, traffic collision, and urban search and rescue 
training.

But Malone says there’s more to do. “We’ll do what we can, even under the 
austerity agenda. The Scottish people and the Scottish government have been 
outstanding, and we will fight for the Scottish government to continue that 
support.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
