
There are few more cheering sights in life than the first phallic heads of 
asparagus poking up through the earth. They are the sign that we are embarking 
on the last great seasonal feeding frenzy left to us. Once, strawberries had a 
similar magic, when for a few short weeks they surfed into our mouths on a 
breaker of double cream and sugar. Then, when they came to an end, you breathed 
a sigh of relief and began looking forward to the season next year. Now, of 
course, strawberries are a year-round fruit and have lost much of that magic, 
along with their flavour. But not asparagus - yes, I know you can get spears 
from Peru or Thailand all year long, but no one in their right mind is going to 
suggest that they are fit to hold a jug of melted butter to our own fat, green, 
succulent masterpieces.

Not that Darren Hedges and I could see many perky tops thrusting through the 
30 or so acres of finely tilled field beside Revills Farm Shop near Pershore, 
Worcestershire. Asparagus purists maintain that you shouldn't eat the divine 
vegetable before St George's Day on April 23, but asparagus has a mind of its 
own when it comes to heaving into view.

Worcestershire has been one of the centres for asparagus growing practically 
since time immemorial (the other major growing areas are Lincolnshire and 
Kent). The light soil of the area is perfectly suited to mega-asparagus 
production. But aside from good, light soil, asparagus needs heat to flourish, 
and this, as Hedges pointed out, has been in short supply so far this year. As 
if to prove his point, a sharp blast of icy wind drove us to take refuge inside 
the farm shop.

Hedges' true calling had been as a photographic printer, but he married an 
asparagus farmer's daughter, moved to Worcestershire from London and threw 
himself into the role of asparagus promoter and food retailer at the farm shop. 
He had all the facts and figures at his fingertips.

"We had 700 crates off this field this time last year. We produced 350 tonnes 
of sellable spears last year from the 600 tonnes that we cut. By hand. It's all 
cut by hand."

Obviously, GW Revill & Son, his father-in-law's outfit, doesn't just supply 
the farm shop. The chances are, if you buy English asparagus in Waitrose, 
Morrisons or Asda, it could well have come from Revill's fields. The modern 
varieties, Hedges said, come from Holland for the most part and go by such 
names as Gijnlim or Backlim. There's Guelph Millennium, too, from the US, and 
Stewart, a purple variety from New Zealand. Those names lack the romance of 
Connovers Colossus, Jersey Knight and Precoce d'Argenteuil, perhaps, but I 
didn't say so. When it comes down to it, what's in a name? It's all in the 
eating, after all. Hedges popped to the back of the shop to cook me up some 
spears he had just cut.

In the meantime, I pottered around the shop, gradually accumulating more 
asparagus for my supper that evening, some early Cornish potatoes (just as good 
as the vaunted Jersey Royal), a pack of flour from Wessex Mills. I passed on 
the local goose, duck and hen eggs, but snagged a tasty looking pork pie 
hailing from the Country Kitchen in Ross-on-Wye, and peered longingly at an 
array of Stillboggin ice cream (incidentally, they make an asparagus ice cream 
that tastes distinctly, if not strongly, of asparagus). Hedges then reappeared, 
and soon I was munching my way through freshly picked, perfectly cooked 
(quickly boiled in very little water) asparagus with that familiar, sweet 
nuttiness and a whiff of something wild and indulgent about them.

That evening, I settled down to a second helping, roasted in butter for about 
20 minutes. I dipped the spears into a soft-boiled egg, poured the roasting 
butter over boiled Cornish spuds and polished off the magnificent pie. Well, 
you can't have too much of a good thing, can you?
