
We might have bags of them in our freezers all year long, but that doesn’t 
stop the rush of happiness at the sight of fresh peas in their pods. My 
four-year-old summed it up when he saw a great heap of them at the market the 
other day: he growled with approval, grabbed a pod, opened it, flicked out the 
peas with his grubby little finger, threw back his head and threw them in his 
mouth. Bravo, said the women next to us.

Of course, there is always the odd pod of cannonballs in the bag, but mostly 
the first peas are rather like young children, tender and innocent, little 
balls of sweet and savoury that pop enthusiastically. A gardening friend once 
told me the first peas you pick should be eaten there and then straight from 
the pod. He meant picked from the plant, but I know he would approve of picking 
them up from a market, or corner shop, or supermarket – these everyday 
celebrations of good things should be as inclusive as possible. Wherever you 
get your peas, I think it is a miracle if the first bagful make it home.

When they do make it home, if they are small and tender, peas need almost 
nothing doing to them. My pea ideal was with that same gardening friend, who 
keeps a gas stove in his allotment shed. He dropped some peas and a sprig of 
mint in boiling water for seconds, then drained the water from the pan on to 
the grass, dotted the peas with butter, then we ate them from the pot sitting 
looking at his plants grow. Back home, I am forever trying to recreate this 
moment, the almost dip in hot water, just enough to heighten the sweet, grassy 
flavour and vivid green colour. Otherwise, I braise peas, usually with other 
vegetables, so they can be added at the end, therefore cooking briefly in the 
sweet combined juices. If the peas are older, more mealy than tender, add them 
earlier; bear this is mind with today’s recipe.

Today’s recipe is for minestrone, a big spring soup. This is one of 10 recipes 
I make all the time, varying it according to what is available. At the moment, 
like the wilderness on top of Testaccio’s sleeping hill, the market and local 
shops are filled with youthful green, there are peas and shoots, broad beans, 
pencil-thin wild asparagus, young waxy spinach, courgettes, the first fine 
beans. This minestrone also needs a potato, and a tin of white beans (if you 
have cooked your own, even better).


The method is probably familiar, as is the addition of the parmesan rind with 
a chunk of cheese still attached, which melts into the soup giving it a deep, 
savoury flavour (and then a cook’s treat). Once you have your solid foundation 
of onion, celery and fennel, is very much up to you when you add things to the 
pan. I like the potato and green beans to be really soft, the courgettes 
tender, then I add the peas at the end. It is the most lovely soup, brothy, but 
with body from the collapsing potato, vegetables full of flavour and 
comforting, peas as bright and full of optimism as a spring day. It’s raining 
in Rome as I write this.

This soup is – like me – much better after a rest, a night even, which is why 
I almost always make double. You could add a handful of pasta or rice in the 
last 10 minutes of cooking, or serve the soup topped with some cubes of bread 
fried in butter. My favourite way to serve this soup though, is with a bright 
green blob of another faithful thing: basil pesto (no claims to authenticity 
here). I have given specific quantities for the pesto, to give you a general 
idea, but you don’t have to stick to them rigidly. Like the minestrone, the 
recipe for pesto is forgiving – if you are thoughtful about ingredients and 
bringing out the best in them, that is.

The recipe will make more pesto than you need for the soup, which means you 
have enough for another meal, which is always good news in this kitchen.

Spring minestrone

Serves 4
1 onion (ideally white)
2 celery stalks, with leaves
1 small fennel bulb 
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Salt
1 potato (around 100g)
100g green beans 
A parmesan rind
1 litre water
1 courgette
200g white beans, cooked
150g peas (preferably fresh)

For the pesto
50g basil
30g pine nuts or almonds
100ml olive oil
1–2 garlic cloves
50g parmesan or pecorino, grated

Related: Rachel Roddy’s Roman spring vegetable stew recipe | A kitchen in Rome 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/19/vignarola-spring-vegetable-stew-recipe-rachel-roddy-kitchen-in-rome>

1 Peel and finely slice the onion, along with the celery and fennel. In a 
large heavy-based pan, warm the olive oil over a medium-low heat, then fry the 
onion, celery and fennel, along with a pinch of salt, until they start to 
soften – about 5 minutes.

2 Peel and dice the potato, then trim and chop the beans. Add both to the pan 
– cook for another few minutes, stirring to make sure nothing catches.

3 Add the parmesan rind and water. Bring to a gentle boil, then reduce to a 
simmer for 15 minutes. Dice the courgette, add to the pan, and simmer for 
another 15 minutes. Add the white beans and cook for another 10 minutes, adding 
the peas when you think best. Taste and add salt as necessary. Take off the 
heat and set aside, ideally for at least an hour.

4 Meanwhile, make the pesto. Pulse the basil, pine nuts, olive oil, and garlic 
together in a blender until you have a paste, then stir in the cheese.


5 If the soup has become too cool, re-heat it very gently, then divide between 
bowls, topping each one with a spoonful of pesto.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award 