
“I wouldn’t bother writing about recipes that involve deep-frying,” a 
well-meaning person once told me. “Nobody deep-fries any more, because nobody 
wants their kitchen and hair to smell like a fish and chip shop – and, of 
course, it isn’t healthy.”

I nodded and made a note to deep-fry as soon as possible. They were right 
about the kitchen smelling, and the hair – especially if you have a frizzy mop 
like mine – but then you turn up the extractor fan, or fling open the door. We 
shouldn’t eat fried things too often, but now and then, something dipped in 
well-made batter and fried until golden and tantalisingly crisp is absolutely 
delicious.

My frying roots extend to the north of England: both my grandmothers knew how 
to fry a good chip; Grandma Roddy in beef dripping, which would congeal in the 
chip-pan that sat on the worktop inbetween sessions. My grandparents also knew 
the best places for a fried tea, so we would drive to The Magpie in Whitby, and 
sit on the wall overlooking the bay, eating great arcs of battered plaice and 
vinegar-sodden chips, kicking our heels against the wall. A whole new level of 
frying came in Rome, where I learned to heat the oil until a cube of bread 
dances around the pan, and how long to cook a leaf, a flower, a fish, some 
hairy borage, and to keep the door open so the smell drifts through my hair 
into the courtyard.

Romans are, for the most part, fantastically fond of fried things. Courgette 
flowers stuffed with anchovy and mozzarella, whole trimmed artichokes (now is 
the moment for these, markets are awash and they are absolutely beautiful), 
salt cod and tiny fish are all fried until golden. It’s a tradition that has 
its roots in Roman Jewish cooking, but has now diffused all over the city, 
especially in pizzeria that serve upfritti before pizza. That is not to say all 
frittiin Rome are good – far from it – but I won’t suggest you go there. Our 
local, a modest temple of fried things, is called La Torricella. Knowing I was 
going to write this, I was there last night, watching Enrico at the fryer, his 
hands floury and capable. He has three ways: batter for the vegetables and salt 
cod, a dusting of flour for the anchovies, and double plunge for the artichokes 
– excellent all. It is a treat to go out forfritti, letting someone else wipe 
the splatters. But every now and then I fry at home, usually on Friday, the 
door wide open, a bottle of prosecco on the go, fried things blotted on kitchen 
towel and then eaten as soon as you can touch them.

Everybody thinks their batter is good, and I am no exception, although I am 
always willing to be taught something new. It is flour, water and a little 
olive oil, which is left to sit for a couple of hours in the fridge. Then, just 
before dipping, I add a couple of egg whites, beaten until I can invert the 
bowl over my head. It is an exceptionally light batter, which works well for 
the three things I am going to suggest frying today: sage leaves, courgette, 
and apple.

So, the frying. I have used both sunflower and peanut oil, which are neutral 
and fine. Ideally, though, when frying just a few things at home, I use 
extra-virgin olive oil, which is expensive and more impertinent in terms of 
flavour, but deliciously so. I am wary of the debate about frying in extra 
virgin olive oil, as I am neither qualified nor good in a debate. I will say 
though, that having talked to others and read the opinions of experts such as 
Luciana Squadrilli, Nancy Harmon Jenkins and Jonny Massey over the past 10 
years, the soundest advice seems to be that extra virgin olive is an excellent 
medium for frying. If kept below the smoking point of 207C/404F, it undergoes 
no substantial structural change and keeps its nutritional value far better 
than other oils, because of the antioxidants and its high levels of oleic acid.

And of course the proof is in the tasting: for a lover of extra virgin olive 
oil (we forsake lots of other things to have it within our pretty tight 
budget), the flavour forfritti is unrivalled. Also, having undertaken 
completely unscientific tests in my kitchen, it appears true that when frying 
in olive oil, a crust forms on the surface of the food that impedes the 
penetration of oil, making things less greasy. What’s more, in the spirit of my 
grandma’s chip pan, olive oil can also be used more than once – three times 
even. But, ultimately, you should fry in the oil you think best, and can afford.

What to fry? I particularly like sage: its musty, granny-attic flavour works 
brilliantly in a crisp batter coat. Buy a small plant, so you can pull off 
leaves with long stalks, which are helpful when swiping in the batter. Apple 
may sound odd, but the sweet flesh contrasting with the crisp batter is a 
delight, especially with a dusting of grated pecorino on top. After artichokes, 
courgettes are my favourite vegetable to fry; if you can find them with 
flowers, even better.

Fritti

This recipe will make enough batter for around 25 leaves, an apple sliced into 
rings and a large courgette.


For the batter (pastella) 
150g plain flour
2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
200ml water (sparkling if you wish)
Salt
2 egg whites

To fry
2 courgettes, cut into 5mm sticks
Courgette flowers (if you can find them)
Sage leaves
Apple, peeled, cored and cut into rings
Salt and grated parmesan for apple
Olive, sunflower ot peanut oil, for frying

1 Sieve the flour into a large bowl. Pour the olive oil into a well in the 
centre and stir to combine with the flour. Add around 200ml water and whisk. 
The batter should be the consistency of double cream, so add a little more 
water if necessary. Rest the batter in the fridge for at least an hour, ideally 
two. Just before cooking, beat the egg whites until stiff, then fold into the 
batter.

2 Heat the oil in a deep frying pan or saucepan to 190C/375F. Prepare a plate 
lined with kitchen towel and a serving plate. Working a few at a time, dip the 
vegetables/leaves/rings into the batter, allowing excess batter to drain back 
into the bowl. Fry until light brown, then drain on the kitchen paper. Move to 
a serving plate, sprinkle with salt, if you wish, and serve immediately.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award
