
“We’re jammin’… And I hope you like jammin’, too.” As Bob Marley was faded out 
across the airwaves, Jeremy Vine turned his attention toJeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. The playlist compiler at 
the BBC knows how to put the boot in. It is not at all clear if the Labour 
leader likes jammin’ or is just jammed, but jammin’ is exactly what he has been 
doing for the past few days as he has struggled to maintain any kind of party 
line on bombing Syria. On Monday, it was going to be a three line whip. On 
Tuesday, it is a free vote. On Wednesday, who knows?


Related: Jeremy Corbyn bruised by tense Labour debates over airstrikes in Syria
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/30/corbyn-bruised-by-tense-labour-debates-over-airstrikes-in-syria>

This latest instalment of Labour’s ongoing Edward Albee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/albee> re-write of “Who’s Afraid of Jeremy 
Corbyn?” was played out on Radio 2 as the existential divisions in the party 
have now become so wide no one is even able to agree if a Labour party 
conference motion has been met or not.

They might as well cancel next year’s party conference right now on the 
grounds that anything it agrees to will be completely meaningless. It cannot be 
long before everyone in the party fails to agree on whether up is really up as 
it could be down if you were upside down in the first place. Even the most 
optimistic therapist would recommend separation as the only humane resolution 
when faced with such irreconcilable differences.

“Why don’t you whip them?” asked Vine. There’s nothing Jezza would like to do 
more right now. Literally. Especially those members of the shadow cabinet who 
he had appointed just months ago and were now in open disagreement with him. 
Tom Watson. Chris Bryant.Vernon Coaker 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/vernon-coaker>. Angela Eagle. Mike Dugher. 
None of them were nearly as afraid of him as they ought to be. If there was a 
Commons vote to launch airstrikes against the Labour hawks, Corbyn would be 
first through the yes lobby. And who could blame him? Every pacifist has his 
limits.

Jezza’s were soon tested still further as, just as he was trying to convince 
the other Jezza that the shambles had actually been a cunning plan to unsettle 
the Tories and unite the party, there was his shadow foreign secretary, Hilary 
Benn, over on Sky News saying he was all up for “bomb, bomb, bombety bombing”. 
Not so much the Divided Self as the Divided Selves.RD Laing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/rd-laing> would be thrilled. Corbyn’s 
breathing became audibly heavier as he tried to explain away the free vote as 
an exemplar of enlightened democracy and diversity in action rather than a 
threat to his authority.

Vine went in for an airstrike of his own. “Diane Abbott said a free vote would 
hand victory to Cameron on a plate,” he chuntered happily. “That was Diane’s 
view yesterday,” Jezza replied, as if he was sure she would have changed her 
mind now that she had had 24 hours longer for proper reflection on the matter. 
That was the nature of re-education; if only his refuseniks would learn the 
errors of their ways so quickly.

“I’m not a dictator,” Jezza insisted, somewhat menacingly. “All I would say is 
that I urge those MPs who are thinking of supporting military action to think 
and think again.” And if that wasn’t enough, they should carry on thinking and 
thinking again until they had come to the right answer. And if that didn’t work 
they could take their chances on deselection. Let’s see how much you lot like 
that.

Somewhere over the past few days, the morality of going to war against Syria 
has become secondary to the far more pressing issue of the civil war in the 
Labour party. No one on theLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
benches seems to really care that David Cameron has spent much of the day 
building himself an Airfix model of a Tornado. Priorities, priorities. Still, 
at least the relatives of all those civilians who will be killed in the 
inevitable bombing campaign can console themselves that at least there was some 
collateral damage back in Britain. Just listen to the Tory shrieks of “win, 
win”.

As Corbyn left to bend more ears and twist more arms, the playlist compiler 
had the last laugh by lining up Hey Little Girl by Icehouse. “When everything 
goes wrong / Sometimes it makes no sense / There once was a time / I should 
have known better then.” Shouldn’t we all?




