
The temptation to add hidden messages to their work is something many artists 
cannot resist. From the scene in Raiders of the Lost Ark where Harrison Ford 
fans have spotted the background hieroglyphics depict R2-D2 and C-3PO, to the 
“backmasking” that Paul McCartney added to Free as a Bird to “give all those 
Beatles nuts something to do”. Today there’s a term for these inside jokes: 
“Easter eggs”.

One of my favourite Easter egg stories comes from the work of the American 
illustrator Al Hirschfeld. There are many things that make his drawings stand 
out – such as his ability to use a single inky line to capture the pose of a 
Broadway singer – but it was the search for his hidden “Ninas” that captured 
the public’s imagination in the 1960s.


Related: The SEAT Ateca: a journey to design perfection – episode three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/apr/18/the-seat-ateca-a-journey-to-design-perfection-episode-three>

Following the birth of his only child, Hirschfeld began hiding her name in 
each sketch, in the curve of a waist or a jangling necklace. Often he would 
give a clue by adding the number of hidden Ninas next to his signature. This 
once led a student to spend hours gazing at a drawing of his in a New York 
gallery looking for 39 Ninas, only to be told that the picture was made in 
1939, six years before Hirschfeld became a father.


The American, who died in 2003 aged 99, came to feel that the hidden Ninas 
were stealing all the attention from his art. He drew his daughter in a piece 
titled Nina’s Revenge, in which he hid his own name, and that of his wife. In 
the end he found it easier to reinstate the Ninas rather than open the mail 
from furious readers. Such was the fiendish challenge Hirschfeld created, the 
US Air Force tested its pilots’ ability to spot his Ninas in order to hone 
their skills in identifying targets.

I love the thought of finding Hirschfeld’s hidden Ninas, and so I couldn’t 
stop smiling when I took a trip to Barcelona and understood the significance of 
the SEAT logo. The SEAT badge is a chrome S bisected by a bold diagonal line, a 
line you can also spot in its adverts or on the doors of its showrooms. And you 
could have been driving your Leon or Ibiza for years without realising what 
this line represents.


You may know that SEAT’s Spanish heritage gives a unique flavour to its cars – 
the sights and sounds of Catalonia are woven into every model it makes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/apr/01/the-seat-ateca-a-journey-to-design-perfection-episode-2>
. And this influence has been distilled into one diagonal line – with exactly 
the same angle as the Avinguda Diagonal, the broad avenue that crosses 
Barcelona. Drive down this wonderful street and you will absorb all the things 
that make the city great, from Gaudí’s buildings to the colourful street art.

Referencing the Diagonal in its logo is SEAT’s way of giving a direct 
connection to the city it calls home. Barcelona is part of the company’s DNA 
and this simple line anchors its creative vision. Once you have spotted it, you 
begin to see diagonals throughout a SEAT car – the tensioned lines that give a 
Leon or Ateca the sense of movement and direction, even when they are parked on 
the roadside.

There are many reasons a creative may choose to embed a hidden message in 
their work. Hirscheld’s unique flourish began as a joke to share with friends. 
The architect Norman Foster was making a grander statement with his design for 
a factory that forms a yin-yang symbol when viewed from above. Unless you are 
hang gliding over the Surrey countryside you will never see it, as Foster well 
knew.


The thing I love about SEAT’s diagonal line is that it is not a showy gesture 
or a cool joke. It isn’t there to amuse fans or impress other companies. It is 
a beautiful design choice that in one bold stroke places Barcelona at the heart 
of all SEAT cars. You won’t find a cleverer Easter egg than that.

