
I don’t remember having trouble sleeping – until my late teens. There was no 
grand trauma, no “aha” moment to pinpoint when my sleep was disrupted. I just 
sort of drifted into insomnia. And there I have stayed, on and off, for almost 
15 years. It has meant exhausted days and nights stretched out in front of me 
like theGrand Canyon <http://www.nps.gov/grca/index.htm>. I have tried to 
remedy it over the years, using pills (soft herbal brands and the hard big 
pharma types), sprays (top picks: lavender and frankincense), a variety of 
“calming” sounds (including whale, panpipes and white noise) and, of course, 
the gold-level option of “wishing really hard”.

Sleep, as I learned via A-level psychology, is a chance to relax and literally 
do nothing (except allow my subconscious to sort through the day’s events), and 
yet I was switched on, sometimes all through the night. My problem is night 
sleeping – I either wake up during the night or fail to fall asleep in the 
first place (during the day, I drift off on trains, buses and in cars). I 
average about four-and-a-half hours a night, which is not ideal for a rich 
human life. I’ve got used to not sleeping; in movie-learned therapy-speak, I 
think that means I’ve hit rock bottom, which makes it the perfect time to see 
Dr Guy Meadows, the clinical director ofThe Sleep School 
<http://thesleepschool.org/>.

Dr Guy (that’s how he introduces himself) is a chirpy sort and I like him 
immediately. He explains that insomnia is essentially learned behaviour: if you 
don’t sleep, your body gets used to not sleeping. “Sleep is natural,” he says, 
before engaging me in a game of tug of war with my scarf. He yanks at it and 
asks what my natural response to that is. In reply, I tug back. “Exactly,” he 
says, delighted by my human predictability. Rather than classiccognitive 
behavioural therapy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/cognitive-behavioural-therapy/Pages/Introduction.aspx>
, Dr Guy usesacceptance and commitment therapy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acceptance_and_commitment_therapy>, which, 
according to his guideThe Sleep Book 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Sleep-Book-Every-Night/dp/1409149102>, “recognises 
that it is our struggle or reaction to pain and suffering that actually makes 
them worse”. The key is to not aggressively “chase” sleep but rather to “let go 
of the rope”. I cannot lie: I’m sceptical. But nothing I’ve done so far has 
worked, so who am I to argue?

I am reassured by the sleep “hypnogram <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypnogram>
” Dr Guy draws me, which shows the patterns of normal sleep and the exact ways 
in which my sleep is utterly borked – you’re supposed to wake up over the 
course of a night, but also to drop straight back. We talk about sleep 
regulation, including “sleep and wake drives” that work in tandem with the
circadian <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Circadian_rhythm> body clock to 
regulate sleepiness and wakefulness, and why naps are only a short-term fix 
(there’s been a lot of follow-up reading, believe me). We talk about orange 
light (soothing and sleep-inducing) and blue light (this induces wakefulness; 
it is the type of light that smartphone screens emit). He concludes that I am 
an “owl” and this, plus modern humans’ generally overstimulated eyes and minds, 
may have exacerbated my sleeplessness over the years.

I implement Dr Guy’s advice straight away. That means I start “darkening down” 
two hours before bed and I shut off my phone half an hour before. He also asks 
me to set a reasonable bedtime, which I put at 12.30am, with a plan to get out 
of bed no later than 7.30am. We even do a bit of mindfulness, which I’ve been 
encouraged to do by myself on my work commute – three minutes, three times a 
day. I do “welcoming/diffusing exercises” in which I repeat my anxious bedtime 
thoughts to the tune of Happy Birthday, and prefix them with “I am having the 
thought that … ”

Does it work? It’s too soon to say definitively. The new bedtime routine is my 
biggest breakthrough. I feel like a baby, but it helps to have an actual 
bedtime. The diffusing exercises are also potent, creating a necessary distance 
between myself and my thoughts. So far, I am mostly sleeping through the night. 
I’m not 100% there yet: some nights I work until 1.30am and on my days off I 
laze in bed until 8.30am. But this is a long-term process and for the first 
time in ages, I am optimistic about licking this insomnia. Sweet dreams.

Dr Guy’s sleep advice for insomniacs

The tug of war is a metaphor I use to convey our human nature to want to win – 
to beat things, to overcome a problem and control it. Our natural instincts 
kick in during a tug of war: one person pulls and the other wants to pull back. 
Over time, it is exhausting and frustrating.

When we encounter sleeplessness, we apply the same methodology. We fight 
against it. We try todo things to make ourselves go to sleep – have a hot bath, 
drink a warm milk, count sheep. All the advice out there about dealing with 
insomnia is about “doing” something to help.

The paradox is that sleeping requires us to do absolutely nothing. If you ask 
a normal sleeper how they do it, they will tell you they do nothing. But if you 
ask an insomniac, they will give you have a list as long as their arm. My 
theory is that it is doing all these things to help us get to sleep that is 
part of the problem.

What can we do to improve the situation? Well, let go. Letting go is about 
acceptance and a willingness to be awake in bed. It’s about accepting 
everything that goes along with insomnia – the worry, anxiety. I teach my 
patients to use mindfulness to observe all these feelings, and let them be.

When people are finally OK with being awake, they don’t get in the way of 
sleep.

Join a Guardian Masterclass in mindfulness

19 January; 6.30pm-9.30pm; £99; London.

Learn how to reduce the stresses of the working day.

theguardian.com/ masterclasses 
<http://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses>
