
“The softly-softly of the onion family” is how Simon Hopkinson describes leeks 
in his bookRoast Chicken and Other Stories. 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/roast-chicken-and-other-stories.html> On the 
next page in the same book is his recipe for leeks vinaigrette – a recipe I 
made so often for a time that my partner Vincenzo pleaded for a breather.

He has never asked for a breather from leek and potato soup, because I think 
he knows better than to do that. It’s a dish that tastes of my past: coming 
home from school to the fug of just-made soup, a waxed table cloth, and my 
brother putting Lego up his nose. But back to “softly” …such a good description 
for leeks. I think of them as polite, too, and down-to-earth; unlike their 
boisterous cousin, the round onion, or the sophisticated shallot and delicate 
chive, you can take a leek anywhere. “Softly” is particularly fitting for this 
recipe, in which leeks are chopped and sweated in butter and olive oil until so 
soft and wilted they are almost a puree and make a great sauce for pasta, 
especially with mussels.

Related: Rachel Roddy’s courgettes and egg linguine recipe | A kitchen in Rome 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/22/linguine-with-courgettes-egg-and-parmesan-recipe-rachel-roddy-a-kitchen-in-rome>

But before we come to the mussels: the leeks, which are inspired by an Anna 
Del Conte recipe, and one I’ve had the joyful experience of watching her make 
in her Dorset kitchen. It was the same meal during which she taught me that you 
need four people to dress a salad: a generous person with the olive oil, a wise 
one with the salt, a mean one with the vinegar and a madman to toss it – 36 
times. She played all four parts with great style, tossing with the vigour of a 
person 70 years her junior. Having cooked the leeks until soft and silky and 
intensely savoury, she stirred them into pasta. I brought the idea back with me 
to Rome, and it has become what I consider a useful one, in that it is good, 
straightforward and lends itself to lots of variations. Leeks cooked this way 
can be mixed with ricotta, which again makes an excellent sauce for pasta. They 
are also good stirred into boiled rice or with soft boiled eggs, or served 
under fish or chicken. I imagine they would also be good on toast with drink or 
a snack –qualcosa da stuzzicare, (to “tease the appetite”) – or, as my grandma 
used to say, “nibbles”.

Now the mussels variation, which is also Anna’s. Not only are mussels lovely, 
they are by far one of the best value things on my local fish stall, which 
makes them even more appealing as we try to tighten purse strings around here. 
Mussels are even better value if you buy them to clean, which means they come 
twisted in huge beards along with a fair bit of debris. I don’t mind pulling 
beards and scraping barnacles – a curved knife is ace for this – especially 
when it means you reveal an inky blue-black shell, with a tortoiseshell tip. 
You need to rinse and rinse: “the water should be clear as a rock pool by the 
end”. Not sure who said that, but it stuck. You cook the mussels pretty much as 
you would for moules marinière, at which point you may feel someone should just 
make a toast and open the wine. Or you could go on, and pull the mussels out of 
their shells to mix with the leeks you have cooked. The combination of silky 
leek with tender, vulnerable mussels in a tangle of pasta is fab.

So two recipes today, one for leeks and tagliatelle – keeping in mind the leek 
sauce can be used in many ways – and a variation with mussels. When you are 
cooking the leeks, Anna suggests you put a layer of buttered baking parchment 
between the leeks and the lid. It really does seem to make the leeks more 
silky, but it is a step you could skip. As always, the pasta cooking water or 
mussel liquor is an essential addition when you toss: it keeps everything 
sliding as opposed to clumping. I have suggested tagliatelle – the flat ribbons 
working well with this sauce – but I imagine linguine, spaghetti or farfalle 
would work well too. And finally cheese, ideally pecorino, most certainly on 
the leek version, but also – flying in the face of the no cheese/fish rule – 
with the mussel version.

Tagliatelle with leeks (and mussels, if you like)

Serves 4
800g leeks – ideally smallish ones
40g butter
4 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Salt and black pepper
A generous splash of white wine
450g tagliatelle
1.5kg mussels (optional)
Pecorino cheese

1 Prepare the leeks: cut away the root and trim 5-10cm of dark green from the 
top, depending on freshness, so you are left with just white and light green. 
Cut the leeks into thin rounds, then rinse well to get rid of any grit, then 
drain.

2 Warm the butter and the olive oil in a deep frying pan over a low-medium 
heat, add the leeks and a pinch of salt and stir until they are glistening. Add 
the wine. Cover the leeks with a piece of buttered greaseproof paper, cover 
with a lid and cook for 20-30 minutes or until the leeks are incredibly soft. 
Pull the pan from the heat. If you are adding the mussels do so now – see point 
4 below.

3 Bring a large pan of water to a fast boil, add salt, stir and add the 
tagliatelle, and set the timer for one minute less than the time on the packet. 
Once the pasta is al dente, drain, reserving a little pasta cooking water, then 
tip into the leek (and mussel) pan and toss well, adding a little pasta cooking 
water (mussel liquor) if you think it needs it. Serve immediately, with grated 
pecorino or parmesan cheese if you like.

4 For the variation with mussels – which can be done in advance - wash and 
scrub the mussels, tugging away the beards, knocking off barnacles and 
discarding any that are damaged or even slightly open. Warm 2 tablespoons of 
olive oil in a wide pan over a high heat. Add the mussels. Once they start to 
sizzle, add the white wine, cover the pan and cook for 2–3 minutes. Remove the 
lid, shake the pan so those on the top (that are slightly open) replace those 
on the bottom (that are fully open) and put back on the heat until all the 
mussels are open. Pull from the heat. Use a slotted spoon to lift the mussels 
from the liquid, pick the flesh from the shells and set aside. Discard the 
shells. Filter the mussel liquor left in the pan through a fine sieve. Add the 
mussels to the leek pan, along with a little of the liquor.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015), winner of 
the 2015 André Simon food book award.
