
George Osborne was dragged deeper into the furore over the Murdoch empire's 
links to government as it emerged that he entertained Rebekah Brooks for a 
weekend at his country residence asRupert Murdoch 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> was planning to take over 
BSkyB.

Also present for the weekend at Dorneywood, the chancellor's grace and favour 
residence in Buckinghamshire, was Brooks's friend,Andy Coulson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/andy-coulson>, the former News of the World 
editor, who at the time was working as David Cameron's director of 
communications inside No 10.

Labour said that the gathering, at a time when the government was evaluating 
how to react to News Corp's £8bn bid for the whole of BSkyB – the biggest in UK 
media history – raised fundamental questions about Osborne's judgment.

News of the weekend gathering will also increase pressure for Osborne to 
appear in person at theLeveson inquiry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, in addition to David 
Cameron, culture secretary Jeremy Hunt, education secretary Michael Gove and 
other senior political figures, to answer questions about their links with the 
Murdoch team.

So far Osborne has been asked only to give written evidence, although his 
aides said he would now be happy to appear if asked.

Details of the Dorneywood sojourn are contained in a lengthy written statement 
to the Leveson inquiry submitted by Coulson, who appeared before it on 
Thursday. Listing his meetings with Brooks during his time working for Cameron, 
Coulson said: "My family and I also spent a weekend at Dorneywood in 2010 as a 
guest ofGeorge Osborne <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> and 
his wife. Rebekah and her husband were also guests."

Osborne has made public four meetings with Brooks during 2010, three of them 
definitely after the May general election. A spokesman for Osborne said he 
believed the Dorneywood meeting was one declared by Osborne as having taken 
place with Brooks in September 2010. The location was not specified, and it was 
listed by the chancellor as having been a merely "social" event.

News of the Murdoch plan to take full control of BSkyB first broke in June 
2010, with News Corp informing the European commission in early November of its 
intention to buy the shares it did not already own.

Giving evidence to the inquiry on Friday, Brooks said that, after briefly 
discussing the BSkyB bid with Cameron at a dinner in December 2010, she had a 
more substantial conversation with Osborne at a restaurant that month.

The next day she emailed News Corp lobbyist Frédéric Michel saying that 
Osborne had expressed "total bafflement" at Ofcom's latest response to the bid. 
But she was not asked, when in the witness box, about the weekend at Dorneywood 
or what was discussed there.

Harriet Harman, Labour's deputy leader, said the revelation raised serious 
questions. "When senior members of a government are looking at a bid such as 
the BSkyB one they have not only to make sure they act impartially but that 
they are seen to be acting impartially.

"Spending a weekend together with a senior executive of the company seeking 
approval for a bid such as this is not acting in a way that will be seen to be 
impartial." Osborne's aides said no discussions of the BSkyB bid took place.

But Labour MP Chris Bryant, a prominent critic of News International over 
phone hacking, said: "After all these revelations it feels like there were two 
halves of a single clan: in the political wing were Osborne, Cameron, Michael 
Gove and Jeremy Hunt, and in the media wing wereRebekah Brooks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/rebekahwade>, James Murdoch and Andy Coulson. 
They seem to have been completely blind to the ethical considerations and to 
have forgotten that in government they are there for the whole country and not 
just for the clan."

Labour also plans to raise questions about whether the home secretary, Theresa 
May, sent a message to commiserate with Brooks after she resigned. In a speech 
to the Blairite pressure group Progress, Labour leader Ed Miliband renewed 
calls for the culture secretary to resign over suggestions he operated a secret 
back channel to News Corp.

Miliband said: "One of the reasons so many people hate politics so much right 
now is that they think politicians stand up for the wrong people, not the right 
people. This is a clear example of that – Jeremy Hunt was standing up for 
Rupert Murdoch, not for the public interest."
