
Everyone has their gastronomic tics – those dishes, or ingredients, or 
techniques, that suddenly make everything else on the menu look like ugly 
sisters. The word "smoky" generally does it for me, although I'm a sucker for a 
nice juicy aubergine as well, so if baba ganoush is available, you can keep 
your boring old hummus – my pitta is only going in one direction.

Like the ubiquitous hummus, this is a dish of indeterminate origins: Levantine 
is probably as specific as you can fairly get, because it pops up,under a 
variety of names 
<http://syrianfoodie.blogspot.co.uk/2009/05/mutabal-and-baba-ghanoush-which-is.html>
, from Turkey to Egypt as a dip, a salad, or a vegetable side. It might be 
loose and smooth enough to scoop with bread, or so chunky you need a fork to 
tackle it – but never less, as Anissa Helou observes, than "exceptionally 
good". And, with aubergine season drawing to a close, this is the time to 
tackle it.

Where there's smoke …
 Rebecca Seal's baba ganoush. 
Smokiness is what defines this dish, setting it apart from your common or 
garden baked aubergine. Ideally, I've found, this is best achieved over a hot 
barbecue, but unless the weather's picked up dramatically in the last few days, 
you'll be relieved to know other options are available.

Helou, writing in Modern Mezze 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/3338276/Twinkle-twinkle-little-starters.html>
, suggests pricking and grilling them, an option also given by Claudia Roden and
Rebecca Seal in her book Istanbul 
<http://hardiegrantuk.productiononline.com.au/Istanbul_emag/#/68/>. The latter 
two also, however, give the option of charring them directly over a gas flame, 
as in Yotam Ottolenghi's recipe. I find this, though much fiddlier and messier, 
gives a far better result: the grilled aubergines seem shrunken and almost 
desiccated, while the others are fairly bursting from their burnt skins.

David Lebovitz hedges his bets 
<http://www.davidlebovitz.com/2008/07/baba-ganosh/>, charring them over a flame 
and then baking them in the oven until soft, but I'm not sure I see the point, 
as long as you bear in mind the advice given to Seal by Gençay Üçok of 
Istanbul'sMeze by Lemon Tree <http://www.mezze.com.tr> restaurant: "If you 
think the aubergines are done, they're not done." They need to be not just 
charred, but collapsing in on themselves, and decidedly soft all the way 
through.

Draining and chopping
 Yotam Ottolenghi's baba ganoush. 
Once you've made a complete mess of your hob charring the skins, they need to 
come off – Ucok seems to think that some people rinse the aubergines in water 
to get rid of them, which he strenuously warns against, but none of the recipes 
I find dare suggest such heresy.

Scooping the flesh out of the papery skins is easy enough: Seal says that some 
Turkish cooks also reject any flesh that is even slightly discoloured, but, 
like her, I enjoy the "intense smoky flavour" these bits supply, so I won't be 
wasting any.

Even after all that cooking, aubergines are watery little things, and if 
you're not to stray into blandly soggy territory, you need to squeeze as much 
liquid out of them as possible. This is generally done with patience and 
gravity, but Seal and Roden both suggest squeezing the flesh out in a sieve, 
rather than letting it drain for Ottolenghi's "hour at least, preferably 
longer", and I must say that, if done diligently, the results seem just as good.

Ottolenghi may be averse to squeezing 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0184v2l/features/baba-ganoush> because he 
leaves his aubergine in "long thin strips" rather than mashing it gently, as 
Seal, Helou and Roden recommend. This makes it more of a salad than the dip I'm 
after – a bit of texture is welcome (Lebovitz whizzes his up in a food 
processor to give a smooth puree that reminds me more of hummus than anything 
else), but I also like baba ganoush to have a bit of creaminess about it.

Garlic
 Claudia Roden's baba ganoush. 
Happily, as it's another ingredient I carry a candle for, garlic is number two 
in the basic trinity of baba ganoush. Quantities vary, with Helou going for a 
modest single clove to six aubergines, while Roden uses a clove per aubergine. 
I like a hefty whack of the stuff, so I'm copying her, but if you're shy, by 
all means add it to taste.

Lemon juice

The final element of every baba ganoush, mutabal or patlican ezmesi is lemon 
juice – and again, quantities vary. Helou is once more parsimonious, as is 
Ottolenghi, while Roden merrily squeezes in as many lemons as she uses 
aubergines. I'm not going to go quite so far: too much citrussy sourness spoils 
the smoky richness of the aubergine, but the dish should have a certain zing 
nevertheless.

Tahini and other additions
 David Lebovitz's baba ganoush. 
The great rift in matters baba ganoush seems to be over adding tahini: Seal 
and Ottolenghi leave it out, and Lebovitz adds a very generous 130g ladleful, 
which may help to explain why his silky smooth baba ganoush tastes so much like 
hummus. The dish is pretty good without it, but I love the way the sweet 
nuttiness works with the creaminess of the slow-cooked aubergine, so I've added 
just a little – not enough to overpower the other ingredients, but certainly 
enough to make its very Levantine presence felt. Roden also, unusually, adds 
Greek yoghurt to her recipe. It is lovely, but I feel it robs the dish of its 
lemony, garlicky punch, so I'll be leaving it out.

Herbs and spices
 Anissa Helou's baba ganoush. 
Lebovitz adds chilli powder, "and sometimes a pinch of ground cumin" to his 
dip; both ingredients that work well with aubergine and tahini, but neither 
absolutely necessary for the proper enjoyment of the dish.

Ottolenghi adds 75ml olive oil to his, which makes sense as he's not using 
tahini, but as I am, I prefer to do as Helou suggests and ring the dish with 
oil instead in the traditional fashion, so each dipped pitta gets a little of 
both. Helou and Ottolenghi also suggest garnishing the dish with pomegranate 
seeds, which look pretty if you have them, but are less vital than the chopped 
herbs that most people suggest as a topping.

Parsley and mint are the most usual choices; Ottolenghi uses both, and Helou 
suggests either/or, while everyone else plumps for one or the other, except 
Lebovitz, who goes for parsley or coriander. I'm not sure about the latter's 
soapy flavour here: the peppery sharpness of parsley seems more fitting, but 
best of all, in my opinion, is sweet mint, which pairs very nicely with the 
aubergine.

Lebovitz and Seal stir some of the herbs into the dish itself, which I like – 
it guarantees a burst of freshness in every mouthful, and stops the greedy 
stealing the garnish. After all, this is a dish that's all about sharing.

The perfect baba ganoush
 Felicity Cloake's perfect baba ganoush. Photograph: Felicity Cloake for the 
Guardian 
2 large aubergines (about 650g)
Juice of 1 lemon, plus a little extra
2 tbsp tahini
2 garlic cloves, crushed
3 tbsp chopped mint or flat-leaf parsley
1 tbsp pomegranate seeds (optional)
2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil

Blacken the aubergines over a gas hob or barbecue, turning regularly with 
tongs, until completely charred and collapsed (you may wish to surround the 
rings with foil, as it can be messy). Allow to cool.

Slit the aubergines lengthways and scoop out the flesh in long strands, 
discarding the skins. Put in a sieve and leave to drain for 30 minutes, or 
squeeze out if you're in a hurry. Season.

In a serving bowl, stir the lemon juice into the tahini until it loosens up. 
Add the garlic and two-thirds of the chopped herbs, and season again to taste. 
Add a squeeze more lemon juice if necessary.

Mash the aubergines gently with a fork, and then stir into the tahini mixture. 
Top with the remaining herbs and the pomegranate seeds, if using. Pour a moat 
of oil around the edge and serve.

Baba ganoush, mutabal, patlican ezmesi – what other variations of smoky 
aubergine dip have you come across on your travels, and which other dishes 
benefit from a little bit of burning? (I'd particularly love a good recipe for 
the pepper and walnut dip muhummara, if anyone has one?)
