
Making the jump from a large charity to a small one was daunting. I had worked 
for large organisations for five years and needed a change. I wanted to make a 
difference on a local level and have more contact with the people the charity 
helped. I knew my job might not be as secure, but that was a risk I was willing 
to take. However, I was shocked at how bad the management and governance was.

I was headhunted by the charity to be the fundraising and marketing manager. I 
was approached because my skills and experience in the sector was “what the 
charity needed” to drive growth, which I was told had stagnated due to a lack 
of experience among existing staff. I was repeatedly reassured by the trustees 
that the funding was available for my position.

At first, I loved it. Working there meant I was able to build stronger and 
more personable relationships with donors and beneficiaries. Camaraderie was 
strong with my colleagues and I could see the immediate impact of our 
fundraising efforts and how the charity’s support was benefiting those in my 
community.

Related: It's hard to lead a charity, especially when you've got to unblock 
the toilets 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/27/lead-a-charity-chief-executive-unblock-the-toilets>

However, I quickly realised that there were no financial, legal or HR 
structures in place. In my first month, I was asked to draw up an employment 
contract for a colleague. This would have been fine, had the colleague in 
question not worked for the organisation for a number of years.

Other things concerned me too: money that came in and out of the office wasn’t 
recorded. There was no database and supporters’ details were recorded on scraps 
of paper. Petty cash was stored in drawers and on desks, and there was no safe 
to lock away money or important documentation. It seemed as if essential 
business practices had been ignored.

My job was to build sustainable income streams, so I worked hard to make new 
contacts, organise events and reach new donors. But things don’t happen 
overnight. My manager, and the charity’s founder, made it clear that we needed 
to “quickly get money in” – I barely had a chance to build anything that could 
help the charity in the long run. Instead, I felt like I was fundraising for my 
own salary. And it turns out I was.

Just a few months after being headhunted, I was told by the trustees that I 
had to be let go for financial reasons. They told me that the charity’s 
financial situation was so dire that they had to step in, and if I was kept on, 
the charity would go bankrupt within months. I felt let down by my manager and 
the board.

Related: My charity is forced to deliver services it is not qualified for 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/oct/18/charity-drug-treatment-services-expertise>

Trustees <http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/trustees> are 
recruited to make sure a charity’s assets, reputation and beneficiaries aren’t 
put at risk. They are supposed to protect the charity, staff and, most 
importantly, the beneficiaries. In this case, they did not. They had stepped in 
too late and failed to protect the charity from imminent bankruptcy.

I know my experience is likely to be in the minority – the majority of smaller 
charities do a wonderful job and reach people that bigger organisations can’t. 
However, proper guidance and structures need to be in place at all charities, 
regardless of their size. Otherwise they only let their beneficaries, staff and 
supporters down.

Confessions of a charity professional is the Guardian Voluntary Sector 
Network’s <http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network> anonymous 
series where charity workers tell it how it is. If you would like to pitch us 
an idea,click here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/02/confessions-of-a-charity-professional-we-want-your-blogs>
.
