
Members of the National Union of Journalists 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> at the Irish 
Independent have shown their support for their departing editor, Claire Grady, 
by describing her as "a journalist of integrity, ability and commitment."

Although the motion passed by the Independent Newspapers' NUJ chapel does not 
formally express disapproval at her enforced departure, it "notes" Grady's 
"resignation... with disappointment".

The warmth of their backing for Grady implies that they are upset at her being 
required to leave after just one year as editor. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2014/aug/27/irish-independent-ireland>

Two people familiar with the situation at the Indo say that Grady was never 
allowed to edit as she would have wished due to interference by the 
editor-in-chief, Stephen Rae. "He made her life hell," said one.

Some of the staff resent attempts by the management of Independent News & 
Media (INM) to scapegoat her for the paper's drop in circulation.

Nor are they happy about the appointment of Ian Mallon as an interim editor. 
This concern lies behind the second part of the NUJ's motion, which calls on 
the company to confirm that her job "and all future senior editorial 
appointments will be filled following an open and and transparent interview 
process, in accordance with best international practice."

In a separate motion, the Indo chapel complained of "deterioration in morale 
within INM titles and the oppressive management culture... which is undermining 
the health and welfare of workers throughout the company." It continued:

"This culture is also reflected in the style of management encouraged 
throughout the organisation, as reflected in the enforcement of editorial 
restructuring and reorganisation.

The NUJ reminds all members that they are entitled under law to dignity in 
their place of work. There is a legal obligation on the company under the 
Health, Safety and Welfare of Work Act to ensure that all employees are allow 
to work without intimidation or fear of bullying.

As an organisation which, through all its publications, calls individuals and 
institutions to account, INM has a particular obligation to ensure that all 
employees exercise their authority in an acceptable and civilised manner.

The chapel demands that senior management take immediate action to ensure that 
managers are aware of their obligations in this regard."

Source: Private
