
What does this phone case say about me?

‘It was so overpriced. My mum said that if I bought it I was asking for 
attention, but I just found it amusing…’

And what it really says


Ha! This phone cover makes me smile. It’s a cheerful, silly-sized piece of 
frippery, designed to be noticed but only because it’s daft. At least that’s 
what you first think: those who know their brands – and Victoria is a fashion 
student – will recognise its style as inimitablyMoschino 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/moschino>.

Moschino is an Italian label that takes pop culture – cartoons, tattoos – and 
merges it with surprisingly classic clothes. It covers traditional dress shapes 
with disposable references. This means it can aim its funny at those with money 
– its style says throwaway, but Moschino isn’t cheap. I’ve checked the price of 
this phone case: it costs £55.

It’s interesting that Victoria paid for it as soon as it came out. Part of 
fashion’s delight is the first-past-the-post element – having something before 
any of your friends; plus Victoria is a modern-day student who lives on credit, 
who has money for now and will work it out later.

If you look closely at the phone case, it mixes a household cleaner with eau 
de toilette. (Toilet and toilette, hoho!) This is a joke, but there are other 
mixed-up references. Spray cleaners are about convenience and freedom: if you 
use them, you have more time to have fun. More time to spend on your 
smartphone, more time to spend on fashion even if you don’t always have the 
money to hand.

It’s quite Warhol-y, really, moving advertising references on to everyday 
objects. Smartphones are as ubiquitous as cleaning products these days, and 
deemed just as vital to life. Who wants to go back to scrubbing things with 
soap, or telephones on the wall? This phone case is all about modernity (it 
only fits an iPhone 6). It says that what Victoria likes about fashion is fun. 
It also says that Victoria has a very big bag.


If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
