
There was a story in the paper this week about some doctor who'd taken gas and 
air on the ward - I only read it because I was looking for the bit where the 
spokesperson from the General Medical Council said, "This is not a misdemeanour 
because Entonox doesn't actually do anything. We're not going to strike him off 
for this, any more than we would for shoving sugar pills up his arse."

I have got to the bit where you obsess about pain-relief options. I don't know 
why I call them options; in fact, there are no options and the process of 
childbirth goes like this: there is a beginning bit, which doesn't warrant 
hospitalisation at all - though, depending on your pain threshold, you might go 
in and be told to go home. Then there is a bit of varying length, during which 
the midwife goes, "Let's just see how you get along," and you (depending on 
your pain threshold, yik yak) say, "Yes, OK," or "I would like an epidural 
pretty soon." ("Well, let's see how you get along," they say again.)

Then there is a shorter bit of unbearable agony that does not depend on your 
pain threshold at all, since there is absolutely nobody with a threshold higher 
than this amount of pain, unless they are already dead. Now you go, "Right, I 
really do want an epidural," and without fail you will be told that it's too 
late. It is the oldest trick in the book. It happens to everyone except 
celebrities and/or the people who finagle themselves some pain relief by way of 
complications.

It is a giant great con, since the whole routine is designed to suggest 
(though never actually say) that there was a sweet spot, a point at which you 
were in enough pain to get the drugs, but not so much that it meant you were 
nearly finished. This sweet spot doesn't exist! The minute you launch into your 
most impassioned, desperate plea, that's the moment they know you're nearly 
done. And they must see it 20 times a day. It would be the easiest thing in the 
world for a midwife to say, "This is the last point at which we could viably 
give you a spinal block. Do you want to do that, or carry on?" But they will 
give you 150 reasons why that's a bad idea, such as, it would "Destroy a 
woman's confidence in her body", or "Slow everything down" (so?) or ... I 
haven't the zeal to list them, I am too hot.

I do not know whether this is cost-saving or the result of decades of hippy 
waffle about natural woman, or maybe a silent equilibrium has been reached 
between those two apparently opposing yet equally annoying motives.

So on the one hand, I am wondering how to get an epidural without being so 
alienating that they take away my gas and air. It's a head-scratcher . . . 
dilation is a bit like ballet; you can't fake it. And on the other hand, I am 
slightly suffused with hippy nonsense, because, in the end, if you don't have 
an epidural, you do get the upside of the overwhelming bliss ... you know, 
here's this perfect creature, which you earned, kind of, by nearly dying. It 
depends on my mood.

Last night, I was in crusading "don't patronise me, midwife-lady" humour, and 
I told two friends that I definitely wasn't going down the route of incredible 
pain again. My friends think I'm much more hard-boiled than I actually am. "Are 
you going to demand a c-section?" said P. "Don't do that. My stomach has a 
horrible ledge." J said, "Yes, but I've got a horrible ledge from a natural 
birth." And P said, "Mine is more like a severed ledge." It sounds like an epic 
poem. Or maybe a terrorist cell from the 70s. "No, no, I'm just going to go in 
and be incredibly clear that I want an epidural." Neither of them seemed really 
convinced by clarity, but what else have you got? Shouting? Everybody shouts in 
maternity wards. That's the whole point.

This morning, conversely, I woke up thinking that I couldn't be bothered 
fighting for drugs, least of all while I was trying to have a baby. I started 
thinking about hypnotherapy. I've given up smoking with it loads of times; it 
works brilliantly on me because I am so weak-minded.

You see, this is why obstetrics works the way it does. They take advantage of 
our woolly confusion. It must have been happening for centuries.
