
1. Find a frugal savings buddy
Ask a thriftier friend to be your savings buddy, and support each other to 
make bigger savings. One idea is to do a “tenner a week” challenge together 
every couple of months – where £10 covers your food, drink, entertainment and 
other personal spending each day for seven days. Then try goading each other 
into starting up “Frugal Fridays” – a weekly night in watching TV.

Related: Saving Britain: the startling statistics. How do you compare? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/aviva-save-smarter/2016/jun/17/saving-britain-the-startling-statistics-how-do-you-compare>

2. Use cash not cards
Payments UK says debit card transactions will be more frequent than cash usage 
by 2021 
<http://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/news-events/news/debit-cards-overtake-cash-payments-2021>
. But setting yourself a spending limit when you’re using a debit card is 
tricky. Try withdrawing a set amount of cash each week instead – then sticking 
to this budget for day-to-day spending. Paying with cash will feel more “real” 
than using a plastic card, and help you make sounder spending decisions.

3. Save in one denomination
Once you’ve decided on the specific amount you are willing to spend each week, 
decide on a denomination of money to stash away. This could be £5 notes. For 
example, after your Frugal Friday, you might treat yourself by going to the 
cinema on Saturday night. Pay for your £12 ticket using a £20 note and you’ll 
have £8 in change – a fiver of which does straight in the piggybank. Do this 
every time you spend money and you’ll quickly build up a decent sum. If fivers 
seem like too much for your budget, try £1 or £2 coins.

4. Buy food daily
Do you regularly find food rotting in the bottom of your fridge? The average 
UK household wastes an astounding£470 per year 
<http://www.lovefoodhatewaste.com/node/2472> in uneaten food. The best way to 
counteract this is to shop daily, rather than doing a big weekly shop. And if 
you have a choice of shops near you, go to a different one each day to take 
advantage of different discount deals.

5. 365-day penny challenge
Start by saving 1p on day one, then 2p on day two and so on – until day 365 
when you’ll be stashing away £3.65. By the end of the year you will have saved 
£667.95. It’s a good kids’ introduction to saving as well.

6. Use decorative containers to save up for holidays
Pimp your piggybanks, jam jars or tins and label them with your goal – Berlin: 
October 2016, for example – to keep the contributions flowing.

7. Make it a competition
Offer a prize among family or friends for the person who can save the most 
each month. Make it something everyone can enjoy, such as a weekend outing 
together, to ensure people give it their best shot.

Discover your financial personality <http://www.avivasavesmarter.co.uk/> with 
Aviva, and find more ways to help you save smarter
