
Full disclosure: I know, OK? I’m making a ukulele. Yes, I know how 
unacceptable that is. At this stage, ukuleles are basically the devil’s tool. 
They’re irritatingly popular at the moment and the curse that currently plagues 
90% of twee advertising jingles. I know, OK? I know.

And yet, I’m still making a ukulele. I’m making it so that I can give it to my 
son, in the vain hope that he’ll come to love music and write an international 
number-one hit and use the proceeds to look after me in my old age because I’m 
jiggered if I’ve got a pension yet. So, yes, I’m making a ukulele this month. 
Suck it up.

About £37 will buy you a box containing all the main ukulele parts – the body, 
the neck, the saddle, the bridge – that you have to assemble yourself. You 
might argue that I can’t truly call this my own handiwork because I haven’t 
painstakingly hand-carved each individual component from a tree that I’d 
nurtured from seed. But it still counts, because ukuleles sound horrible at the 
best of times and if I’d been given any more responsibility over the 
construction, there’s a very good chance that it’d sound like 15 geese flinging 
themselves through a malfunctioning wood-chipper at a cursed harp. Trust me, 
this way is best.

It’s basically a case of gluing all the wooden parts together, then screwing 
the tuning keys in. It’s trickier to attach the bridge, because if you get your 
measurements wrong, every song you play will more or less sound like evil clown 
music.

Once you’ve cobbled up a ukulele shape, you paint it. I bought a set of 
acrylic paints and walked home dreaming about an elaborate brightly-coloured 
pattern that would best appeal to a nine-month-old baby. Once home, I 
remembered that I have as much artistic ability as a radish and daubed on some 
rudimentary swirls. In its own way, it actually looks kind of charming. It’s a 
one-of-a-kind piece, which I suppose is good because if you ever walked past a 
full display of them, you’d immediately keel over with a cluster migraine.

Finally, I thread the strings. This was the hardest part. The diagrams in the 
kit were useless. Fortunately, YouTube is my friend. It’s positively rammed 
with videos showing you how to string a ukulele. Admittedly they’re all hosted 
by jolly people who look like they’d tell you to “take a chill pill” without 
irony but, look, needs must.

And that’s it. My very own ukulele. Once complete, I handed it to my son with 
great ceremony. “Here,” I thought. “With my own bare hands I’ve crafted your 
first step towards a lifetime of music.”

He took it, looked at it for three seconds, then dropped it in favour of 
slamming his hand against a radiator. Maybe he’s more of a drummer.

You can buy the ukulele building kit online at presentsformen.co.uk
