
The chief inspector of schools has called on ministers to tighten the rules on 
home education, claiming they are being exploited by a growing number of 
illegal schools across England.

More than 100 suspected unregistered schools have been uncovered by inspectors 
in the past five months. At some of them children are being taught in “unsafe 
and unhygienic premises” by staff who have not been properly checked.

Sir Michael Wilshaw, who heads the schools watchdog Ofsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, said many of those running 
unregistered schools were “unscrupulously” exploiting the freedom parents have 
to choose to home-educate their children.

A crackdown on unregistered schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/11/ofsted-unregistered-schools-inspectors-faith>
 began in January with the launch of a specialist taskforce made up of seven 
experienced inspectors, who are said to be deeply alarmed by what they have 
uncovered.

Suspected new cases are being reported each week, and Wilshaw said the schools 
revealed so far were likely to represent only a small proportion of the problem.

In a letter to the education secretary 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/523430/Unregistered_schools_advice_note.pdf>
, Nicky Morgan, on Monday, Wilshaw wrote: “Evidence inspectors have gathered 
over recent weeks has reaffirmed my belief that there is a clear link between 
the growth of unregistered schools and the steep rise in the number of children 
recorded as being home-educated in England over the past few years.

“I have previously voiced concern that many of those operating unregistered 
schools are unscrupulously using the freedoms that parents have to home-educate 
their children as a cover for their activities. They are exploiting weaknesses 
in the current legislation to operate on the cusp of the law. Many are charging 
parents thousands of pounds to send their children to these unregistered 
schools.

“In doing so, many are providing a substandard education, placing children at 
risk and undermining the government’s efforts to ensure that all schools are 
promoting British values, including tolerance and respect for others.”


He said latest evidence suggested there were many more children in 
unregistered schools than previously thought.

In April inspectors issued seven warning notices to suspected illegal schools 
in London, Birmingham, Luton, Wolverhampton and Staffordshire. In total around 
350 children were found on the schools’ premises.

The inspectors found serious fire hazards, unchecked staff and volunteers, and 
unsafe premises. In one instance, chemicals and chemistry equipment were found 
in an unlocked cupboard in a room where pupils ate their lunch.

A Department for Education spokesperson said the government was taking steps 
to ensure that the system governing home education was robust, but said the 
rights of parents to decide how and where to educate their child had to be 
protected.


“Nothing is more important than keeping children safe, and councils have clear 
powers to take action where there are concerns regarding a child’s wellbeing,” 
the spokesperson said. “We have given new resources to Ofsted to investigate 
unregistered schools, and to prepare case files for prosecution by the CPS.”

The department has consulted on plans to better protect children in 
supplementary schools offering intensive education out of school hours, and is 
expected to make an announcement shortly.

On home education, the DfE spokesperson said: “Parents may choose to 
home-school their children and many do a good job, but that education must be 
of a suitable quality. We are taking steps to ensure the system is as robust as 
it can be when it comes to protecting young people, while at the same time 
safeguarding the rights of parents to determine how and where to educate their 
children.”

A BBC investigation <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35133119> last year 
found a 65% increase in the number of children recorded as home-educated in the 
UK over a six-year period, but any figures for the total number being 
home-educated is likely to be an underestimate.

When parents withdraw a child from school, that child is registered as being 
home-educated, but children who never start school may not be feature in the 
statistics. There is no legal obligation for parents to send their children to 
school, but they have to provide a “suitable education” at home.

The shadow education secretary, Lucy Powell, said the government had allowed 
worrying and potentially dangerous practices to evolve in the schools system. 
“The Tories’ education policy has led to a fragmented schools system lacking 
robust local oversight to spot and tackle serious problems early on,” she said.


“As a result, many children are dropping off the radar or ending up in 
illegal, unregistered schools for months or years, where they are at risk of 
being exposed to harm, exploitation, or the influence of extremist ideologies.

“We urgently need the government to take tough action and instil a robust 
system of local oversight and accountability of all local schooling, regardless 
of type, so that communities can work together to improve standards and stop 
children from ending up in harm’s way.”

On Monday the British Humanist Association launched a website, Faith Schoolers 
Anonymous <http://faithschoolersanonymous.uk/>, to enable pupils who have 
experienced difficulties at faith schools to share their experiences and in 
some cases to act as whistleblowers.

A former pupil at an illegal Charedi school said: “A lot of good work has been 
done in recent months to bring attention to the plight of children still 
trapped in illegal religious schools, as I once was, and that momentum has to 
be built upon if these places are to be shut down once and for all.

“Faith Schoolers Anonymous will be a vital tool in ensuring that the desperate 
experiences of these children stay on the agenda and do not go on being 
ignored.”
