
What are the rules about wearing one’s hat indoors?

George, London

Now, this is a tricky one, George, because it’s a subject on which my opinion 
has altered violently. And this is a disaster! My God, everyone knows that 
newspaper readers cling to the opinions of columnists like passengers on the 
Titanic fastened on to the few lifeboats there upon the chopping, churning sea. 
I was never one to toot my own horn, but I think we can all agree that, in this 
world of desperate uncertainty and political upheavals, where Russell Brand is 
trusted by more people than politicians and it turns out football is full of 
corruption, the one thing people can turn to is the opinion of newspaper 
columnists.

And everyone knows the most trusted of this breed is, of course, the fashion 
columnist. Where on earth would the people be without the fashion columnist 
there to say whether skirts should be on the knee or just below it, whether 
one’s chunky high heels should make one look like a frail fawn learning how to 
walk or like a dominatrix? They would be utterly lost, I tell you, wailing in 
the streets, rending the burlap sacks they wear as they have no idea what else 
to don, beseeching the skies above them: “Oh for God’s sake! Please! Send us a 
guru from whom we can learn what to wear, when and how!”

Believe me, awareness of the responsibility weighs heavily on me daily, and I 
shoulder it like a fashion editor shoulders her Gucci coat (because everyone 
knows you should only wear your coat on your shoulders andnever make use of the 
sleeves – sleeves are for proles). Thus, each of my golden opinions about 
fashion must – Shakespeare would say if he’d had the good sense to stay alive 
for another 400 years – be “an ever fix’d mark” and “alters not with his brief 
hours and weeks”. Some people think Sonnet 116 is about love, but I have always 
known it’s really about this column.

Which brings us to the issue of hats indoors. Now, for the longest time this 
seemed like the easiest opinion on which to maintain an ever fix’d mark. For a 
start, I had history on my side in the form of Emily Post, the fashion 
columnist’s guru, who, in the strongest of Emily Post-ian terms, urges that 
gentlemen remove their hats in all circumstances indoors.

Second, there is “tosser fashion”. But what, you cry, mouths eagerly agape, is 
“tosser fashion”? Calm yourselves, my naive acolytes, I shall explain. Tosser 
fashion, you see, is a look that alerts others you are, indeed, most likely a 
tosser. Truly, where would you be without me to explain such tricky concepts to 
you? Those godawful Maharishi trousers, so popular about a decade ago among 
footballers and reality TV stars, are a classic example of tosser fashion. 
Juicy Couture tracksuits with “Juicy” written across the arse: total tosser 
fashion. Trucker caps; thongs hoiked above waistbands; skinny jeans on men – I 
think you’re getting the picture. Another definite entry into the file that is 
“tosser fashion” is beanie caps on men worn at all times, whether 
it’s summertime or, indeed, indoors. Men who do this think they look like David 
Beckham, Colin Farrell or Brad Pitt; anyone who sees them thinks they just look 
like tossers. Thus, another argument against wearing a hat indoors. Oh, how 
steady and reassuring my opinion was for the people, like an old oak to which 
they could cling when buffeted about by winds of uncertainty.

Until now. It has come to this column’s attention that a certain British 
politician has adopted a hat as his signature style and he wears it both 
indoors and out. I’m rather fond of people’s signature styles. I can’t even 
commit to watering a plant, so anyone who can make such a firm commitment to a 
style look is a person to be saluted, in my opinion. I’m not sure when, exactly,
George Galloway pledged his troth to his fedora 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/28/george-galloway-tweets-intention-run-london-mayor>
, but he has done so with such devotion and fervour that I now find it hard to 
imagine him without it, which is not surprising as he refuses to take it off 
even when indoors.

Now, Galloway and I have had our beef in the past. I said one thing, he said 
another – oh, let’s not dredge up pastbroiges 
<http://www.thejc.com/judaism/jewish-words/broiges> (to use the Yiddish 
expression)! The important thing is, really, that Galloway has a fedora and 
he’s not afraid of using it. Indeed, someone has wisely spotted that his hat is 
his calling card and, on the poster for his mayoral campaign, there is a giant 
black fedora along with the oddly un-hat-related slogan “Put London in Safe 
Hands”. Leaving aside the sadly missed opportunity to make a fedora-based pun 
here (Vote Fedora Right Man!), I could not approve of this poster more. I wish 
more politicians would understand that the people don’t care a jot what they 
have to say about “hard-working families” (how about those of us without 
families, who don’t really work hard at all? What about us, eh?) – we just look 
at what they’re wearing and judge them accordingly. Male politicians tend not 
to give us much to work with – suit, tie, blah blah – so fedoras doffed (and 
quickly replaced) to Galloway for offering so much more. I’m not sure if he 
really wants my vote for mayor, but I definitely endorse his hard-working 
fedora.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com <>.
