
Do you know what people actually wear to go to fashion shows? The relatively 
normal people who go to fashion shows for relatively normal, job-related 
reasons, I mean, rather than the people whose career is being able to monetise 
having a photograph taken in a cherry headdress or gold lamé thigh boots.

Pleated skirts. That’s what we wear. Last time I was at a show, I was wearing 
a dress with a pleated skirt, and about 25% of the women in the room were in a 
similar outfit. The only other time I remember such a concentration of pleated 
skirts and dresses being the norm was when the teachers at my school were 
gathered on stage for end-of-term assembly.

When the trend for pleated skirts first re-emerged a couple of years ago, it 
didn’t seem likely to last, for the simple reason that pleated skirts are a bit 
frumpy and unflattering. If you were to take a strict sex-sells interpretation 
of fashion, you would not bet on the pleated skirt being a commercial hit. This 
is not going to be your lucky skirt, not in that way, at least. There is no 
evolutionary explanation for its survival.

But that’s why, in a slow-burn rather than a knee-jerk way, it has triumphed. 
The pleated skirt nails the look you need for smart daytime, which is that you 
have dressed deliberately and with care. Also, if you are hoping during your 
day at work to engage with other human beings on a slightly more intelligent 
level than you might when shouting above the music in a pub on a Friday night, 
it helps to dress as if the scope of your interests extends beyond: does my bum 
look big in this? And on a practical level of nine-to-nine dressing, pleats are 
genius, because they feel loose to wear, but look sharp.

A crew-neck sweater is a good match, but needs a necklace or shirt collar or 
scarf at the neck. Don’t succumb to the lure of a wide belt, which makes the 
look twee and retro when you want modern and relaxed. Think J Crew catalogue, 
not Tupperware party hostess. And if you still feel dowdy, there’s always a 
cherry headdress.

• Jess wears dress, £85, topshop.com <http://www.topshop.com>. Heels, £295, 
russellandbromley.co.uk <http://www.russellandbromley.co.uk/>.

Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
