
The phonics argument appears to have been cut and dried, at least so far as 
the teaching of children in primary schools is concerned. In the world of adult 
literacy, however, the battle continues. Opinions remain divided on the 
effectiveness for older learners of this method, which connects the sounds of 
spoken English with letters or groups of letters.

The fact that phonics is primarily associated with teaching very young 
children the basics of reading has led many teachers working with adults to 
make scant use of it. And there has been a widespread assumption that adult 
learners will not be very receptive to a method they could perceive as babyish 
and of which some might have unfavourable memories.

But advocates of phonics as a key tool in teaching adults to read believe the 
time is ripe for a change in attitudes. They hope to get the go-ahead and 
funding for a major experiment they are confident will produce compelling 
evidence for their case.

Their hope is that the study will have a similar impact to the one that 
convinced the Rose review of the primary curriculum in 2005 to plug "synthetic 
phonics" as the main modus for teaching young children to read, and the 
government to accept this recommendation.

A proposal to carry out a substantial randomly controlled trial comparing 
phonics with other mainstream methods of teaching adult literacy has been put 
to the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) by a team of academics from 
London University's Institute of Education and the University of York.

"It's due to be considered by the relevant committee at the ESRC in the next 
month or so," says Professor Greg Brooks, one of the team. If all goes 
according to plan, Brooks - who was a member of the Rose review led by the 
former Ofsted director Sir Jim Rose - reckons it will have a powerful effect on 
adult basic skills education. "It ought to convince adult literacy teachers 
that this is something they should take seriously and incorporate into their 
teaching practices," he says.

His confidence has been boosted by a recent project that looked at three 
approaches to adult literacy, including phonics. Although a small number of 
teachers was involved, the results were dramatic.

Only two out of nine teachers from across the country who took part had 
previously used phonics to any significant extent with adults, though all had 
had some training in it. Throughout the autumn of 2007 all used phonics 
systematically. Eight of the nine said they would definitely continue to use 
the strategy.

The approach also proved popular with the students, who were mainly at the 
lowest stages of literacy (entry level 1-3). According to the assessment, they 
made "significant progress in reading comprehension and spelling" and this was 
achieved in a very short time. On average they attended only five or six 
sessions between assessments of reading and spelling.

Although relatively modest, this is the largest study of teaching strategies 
in adult literacy carried out to date in Britain and it fills a gap. There was 
an almost complete lack of evidence relating specific teaching strategies to 
any progress that adult literacy students make, Brooks says.

The study was led by his partner and academic colleague Maxine Burton and a 
group at Sheffield University, commissioned by the National Research and 
Development Centre for AdultLiteracy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/literacy> and Numeracy (NRDC) and funded 
by the Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills. The final report on 
the project is awaiting Dius's go-ahead for publication, although Burton and 
the team have produced a "practitioner guide" for teaching phonics based on the 
study.

Like Brooks, Burton is pleased at the extent to which the participating 
teachers warmed to phonics. "There is a controversy about using the strategy," 
she says. "It's associated with teaching reading to children and adult literacy 
practitioners are fairly careful not to teach adults like children. And the use 
of phonics in teaching children has faced controversy - but recently there has 
been a volte face on this."

The hypothesis Burton wanted to test in the NRDC project was why, if it was 
now shown to be effective with children, the phonics approach should not work 
well for adults. But first it was important to clear up a misunderstanding, she 
says.

"People imagine the phonics method means that nothing but phonics is used," 
she says. "Our approach is that it should be part of a much broader curriculum."

June Borrowdale, one of the teachers who took part, endorses this. Though 
considerably more enthusiastic about phonics after the project than she was 
before, she says she would never present it without other strategies. An 
undiluted diet of phonics would become boring.

Borrowdale, who is based at North Nottinghamshire College, moved into basic 
skills teaching five years ago. She did a year's training course at Sheffield 
Hallam University, which included some phonics. "It wasn't given particular 
prominence," she says.

Her class of up to eight students were on the lower entry levels of literacy 
and they were eager to try different approaches "because these people were 
getting pretty desperate. They had tried and tried over the years and nothing 
had worked."

Most of them had heard about the success of phonics with children. "We did 
have a resistance from a couple of learners because they felt it was babyish - 
sounding out c-a-t," Borrowdale says. "But I explained that it was important to 
go back to the beginning." To vary the mix and reinforce what students had 
learned, she would use games, but again these needed to be introduced with 
care: "You have to make clear with adults that they are learning, that the 
games have a purpose."

The project opened her eyes to phonics. "There was lots of repetition but it 
did work and at the end of the year the learners felt they had benefited," she 
says.

There are, however, formidable sceptics about phonics. Alan Wells, former 
director of the now-defunct Basic Skills Agency, says phonics might prove 
useful with a very small group of adults who have no reading skills. But the 
vast majority of adults who need help with reading and writing are not at the 
lowest entry levels. "For adults, who have far more problems than young 
children, I doubt whether phonics are going to work," says Wells. "They have a 
wide range of problems, from spelling to poor comprehension."

The common explanation from adults who could not read had formerly been that 
they had been at the back of the classroom and overlooked by teachers, but this 
is becoming rarer, he says. "You won't find many who had problems at school and 
were not targeted with a range of methods. If all these interventions, 
including pretty certainly phonics, haven't worked, I'm not sure that they are 
going necessarily to work now."
