
Look, it’s become utterly ridiculous, did they have trick or treat when you 
were young? OK, well, they didn’t when I was – it was all about penny for the 
guy and bonfires. The real thing’s been completely destroyed by a cynical US 
import with no connection to British traditions. Right, so there was Mischief 
Night, but at least all you needed for that was treacle and a few eggs; there 
was none of this commercial stuff, bar the fireworks, obviously, before 
elf’n’safety put paid to that. That used to be part of the fun, a lit catherine 
wheel landing on your anorak.

I wouldn’t mind the pumpkins, within reason, provided there’s soup, but it’s 
the sugar – why would any responsible adult volunteer their child for an 
obesity marketing exercise? I’d ban it, actually, enforce it with a few asbos, 
I don’t think that’s too strong. However you look at it, taking children trick 
or treating is basically teaching them to use menace to extort drugs – you 
might as well give them mugging lessons. Doesn’t anyone think of the 
pensioners? I just turn off the lights and go to bed. Well, you try offering a 
box of raisins to a massive pubescent in a Scream mask, oh no. Every year, I 
take the battery out of the doorbell and come out only after it’s all over.

I wouldn’t mind if it was just the tinies, but the way grown men and women 
carry on with their wigs and Halloween bunting, would you believe? And it’s 
earlier every year: next thing you know, they’ll get started after Easter. You 
can’t help thinking, what if all the effort and money that goes onHalloween 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/halloween> went to charity? Of course, 
it’s worth too much to big business now – have you seen the shops? These 
skeletons and gravestones all over the place, I’d be amazed if some toddlers 
aren’t traumatised for life, and just try buying a cake without an eyeball on 
it in October. The whole thing is completely out of hand, why people couldn’t 
be happy incinerating a human effigy on a 50ft pyre, like in the old days, I’ll 
never understand.
