
I grew up on a working farm in Shropshire and often helped my dad. On a 
summer’s day three years ago, I helped him cut up a large oak. A dealer had 
taken the trunk away, leaving the limbs. That morning we set off to chop up the 
remnants. Wood gets heavier the longer it sits on the ground and this had been 
there for a couple of months, in sections weighing around two tonnes each. They 
were stacked on top of each other with a big 70ft limb, known as a lodger, 
sticking up in the air.

I was standing about 10 metres away from the tree with my back to my dad, 
making a bonfire with the branches, when I heard a faint gasp. I turned around 
to see that the lodger had fallen on to my dad’s back, crushing him against a 
branch below. I ran to him and held his hand; it was tense but there was no 
pulse. Then I felt it relax. There were no signs of life.

The next 30 minutes were a blur. Neither of us had a mobile because there was 
never any signal where we were, so I drove to some cottages about half a mile 
away. I beeped the horn frantically and shouted: “Find anyone – my dad’s under 
a tree!” I burst through the door of the first cottage and ran up and down the 
stairs, but no one was there. In the second one, I found an elderly lady, but I 
knew she wouldn’t be able to help. I just kept going. Someone called 999 for 
me, and the last house I knocked on belonged to Stuart Wilkes, a firefighter.

Stu tried to make sense of what I was saying and told me to put planks of wood 
into the boot of his car, where he had a full medical kit, including a 
defibrillator. We didn’t have a second to lose. I jumped in the car and hit the 
accelerator, driving over a cattle grid, which caused some planks to fall out 
of the open boot. I also realised I had driven off without Stu. When he caught 
up with me, he gave me some strong words and a slap, saying I wasn’t going to 
save my dad’s life until I calmed down.

Arriving back at the scene, I saw that the fire brigade and air ambulance had 
arrived, but there could have been a dancing bear and I wouldn’t have noticed. 
I was only focused on Dad, who was now the colour of a blueberry. I grabbed the 
chainsaw and started trying to cut him out, sawing dangerously close to his 
ear. Stu quickly took over from me and began sawing off sections while 
instructing the rest of us to take the weight of the branch, slowly lifting it. 
Once freed, Dad was laid out flat on the ground and we began to do CPR. It was 
then that we were able to see the full extent of his injuries. His chest was 
exposed, and I could see one of his lungs. His stomach was swollen. One of the 
medics cut small nicks on either side of his abdomen to let out fluid. Colour 
rushed into his face and he began to vomit. A wave of relief rushed over me; up 
to this point I thought he was dead. And by definition he still was, because 
there was no pulse. The air ambulance rolled him on to a stretcher and flew him 
to hospital.

My mum had been out food shopping and only found out about everything when she 
got back. I knew the worst of it was over and just said: “Mum, everything’s 
OK.” But for her the drama was just beginning. Dad was induced into a coma to 
help him recover. Day after day we would sit with him. Even the tiniest signs 
of life, such as his pee bag filling up, were glimmers of hope. After a couple 
of days the doctors decided to operate; nine hours later, he was awake and 
could stand up. To come out of an accident like that, with no major damage to 
his brain or body, was a miracle.

Related: Experience: I paid to have my daughter kidnapped  
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/25/i-paid-to-have-my-daughter-kidnapped-experience>

When he came out of hospital six weeks later, we walked up to the stump of the 
tree. Not only did he have no memory of what happened, he couldn’t remember the 
whole month before the accident.

Later that year, Stu won an off-duty Lifesaver of the Year award. He is 
incredible: he has dedicated 25 years of his life to dealing with trauma and 
tragedy.

In forestry, the lodger is also known as the widowmaker. To say we were lucky 
is an understatement.

• As told to Celia Lloyd-Jones

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
