
I was born on the volcanic island of St Vincent, just west of Barbados. I I 
was always roaming free: hiking mountains and climbing coconut and mango trees. 
My mum worked with the United Nations and was offered a position in West 
Africa, so we moved there when I was 12. I spent a lot of time fishing and 
hunting with the indigenous community, and they introduced me to 
agricultural-style food-growing. I enjoyed playing cricket and was recruited to 
play for the national team in the Gambia. I spent three years playing 
professional cricket, and although it was fun, my heart was drawn to living on 
and from the land.

When I moved to the UK for my university studies, my passion for food-growing 
intensified. I’ll never forget my first year in London: I had massive failures. 
The climate was really different: the tastes of my childhood, such as okra, 
just couldn’t cope with the cold. I was intrigued by the concept of taking a 
more natural approach to growing food, so I studied permaculture.

Along the journey I met my wife, Caroline. We moved to Devon with our son in 
2014, where we now live inan off-grid community <http://landmatters.org.uk/> 
set in 42 acres. I’m specialising in how to use small spaces for intensive 
growing and self-sustainability, and teach introduction to permaculture courses 
and more specialist subjects, such as composting.

When I lived in London, I helped set up May Project Gardens 
<http://mayprojectgardens5.wix.com/may-project-gardens>, growing food and 
teaching people about nature. The disconnect that I noticed between those young 
people and nature was heartbreaking. I hope that my son will grow up to 
appreciate the wisdom that nature has to offer us.

In my garden, you can find lots of examples of permaculture: companion 
planting, herb spirals, plants and edible flowers to attract insects and bees 
for pollination. One of my favourite plants is comfrey; I use it a lot to make 
liquid feed for plants. It also has beautiful flowers that the bees love, and 
amazing medicinal uses, too. I have it all over my garden.

Related: Me and my garden: ‘There’s no reason why someone in a wheelchair 
cannot design beautiful gardens’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/14/how-does-your-garden-grow-mark-lane>

My favourite spot

I spend a lot of time sitting around the fire pit, observing the vastness of 
the land when the sun goes down. There’s something primal about a good fire.

• Interview by Jane Perrone. How does your garden grow? Email 
space@theguardian.com <mailto:space@theguardian.com>
