
The Russell Group of leading universities has called on the government to drop 
plans for a free-for-all in undergraduate recruitment next year, following 
publication of a report that suggests the policy could have disastrous 
financial consequences.

Although the government expects undergraduate enrolments to rise in 2015 once 
existing caps on student recruitment are removed, the report said evidence from 
the same policy in Australia saw student numbers balloon well beyond official 
forecasts, forcing the government there to spend hundreds of millions of 
dollars more on higher education.

"One of the things no one knows with absolute certainty is how many students 
will roll up when the number caps come off," said Hillman, a former special 
advisor to David Willetts as higher education minister and director of the 
Higher Education Policy Institute, which compiled the report.

"It would be naive to think the policy will be simple to roll out, especially 
if higher education suffers further cuts after the 2015 election," Hillman 
warned.

The change – announced by chancellor George Osborne in the autumn statement 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-25236341> – allows universities in England 
to recruit as many students as they want from September 2015. Osborne said the 
expansion would be funded by selling off student loans – but that policy has 
recently come into question, with business secretaryVince Cable saying the sale 
would not go ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jul/20/vince-cable-cabinet-tensions-scrap-student-loan-sell-off>
.

Wendy Piatt, director-general of the Russell Group of universities – which 
represents research-intensive universities such as Oxford and Manchester – said 
the HEPI report on Australia's experience raised "serious concerns" about the 
ending of firm controls on student numbers.

"Now that the government no longer intends to use the sale of the student loan 
book to fund the uncapping of student numbers in England, we would urge it to 
abandon the policy or at least consider much more robust ways of controlling 
costs and quality," Piatt said.

"We would be extremely concerned if the substantial funds required to pay for 
additional students were taken from the already very stretched budget for 
research and higher education. It would be very worrying if this policy leads 
to less funding per student. Good teaching requires proper levels of 
investment."

While Australia spent years preparing the groundwork for open enrolments in 
its universities, the English approach "was put together quickly and remains 
fuzzy," according to Hillman, including the Treasury's forecast of an 
additional 60,000 students a year.

"It's as good a guess as anyone else's guess – but it is a finger in the air. 
When the Australian government went through a similar process, they ended up 
underfunding the policy," Hillman said.

"Even if only 60,000 people extra turn up in 2015-16, as the sector works out 
how the system works, they'll look for new opportunities, and one of those 
opportunities is offering more access to higher education courses and getting 
people in that way."

The Department for Business, Innovation & Skills did not reply to requests for 
comment.

Professor Steve West, chair of the University Alliance 
<http://www.unialliance.ac.uk/> group of newer universities such as University 
of Portsmouth and Coventry University, said Australia's example was "incredibly 
important" for England.

"We need to set out a longer-term plan for solving the problem and creating a 
sustainable higher education system," said Prof West,vice-chancellor of the 
University of the West of England 
<http://www1.uwe.ac.uk/aboutus/structureandgovernance/thevice-chancellor/vice-chancellorsprofile.aspx>
, in Bristol.

"The UK needs to ensure it is able to grow the graduate population, as our 
global competitors continue to do, and to encourage talent from right across 
society."

The report by Australian academic Andrew Norton, who co-wrote a review of the 
policy for the Australian government, also suggests that "fee deregulation" is 
a logical progression from opening up enrolment without limit on numbers or 
qualifications. That would potentially allow universities to compete on tuition 
costs, with the more prestigious universities able to charge more while others 
opted to attract students through lower fees.

The Australian experience also showed a drop in the average level of 
qualifications of students enrolling – offering more access opportunities for 
students who currently struggle to find places in universities.

The new policy opens up unexplored possibilities for private institutions and 
colleges offering access to higher education courses, designed to prepare 
students without appropriate qualifications for undergraduate study.

Pam Tatlow, chief executive of Million+, a think-tank supported by 
universities, said the Australian experience showed deregulation created risks 
for students, taxpayers and universities. "A free-for-all approach may be 
attractive in principle but as Australia shows only too clearly it is by no 
means plain sailing," Tatlow said.
