
The dilemma My husband and I married recently. I am not his first wife. We 
came together with all our baggage from three decades of separate existence 
that included furniture, curtains, artwork and one dog. We’ve had our ups and 
downs deciding how to fit it all into our new home together, and there have 
been plenty of arguments about which individually “treasured” possessions we no 
longer have space for in our new life together. We’ve been battling for the 
last two years and, thankfully, tempers have died down. Except my husband has 
started buying more, which would be fine if our flat wasn’t already packed, and 
more importantly if he chose to consult with me before committing. If I don’t 
like his purchases (the latest a large ornate cabinet), he gets angry and say I 
am ungrateful. As for children, I’m beginning to think they’ll never be an 
option as we simply don’t have the space!

Mariella replies It’s certainly a conundrum. In this brave new world of 
recoupling and rejigged families and often not even getting together until half 
our lives have already passed, it’s a dilemma that’s on the rise. Just when you 
thought that finally in maturity you’d found the perfect person to settle down 
with, war breaks out over the lives you both drag along with you.

There are therapists aplenty kept in business by the trials and tribulations 
of blended families. I’m surprised there aren’t more interior advisory services 
for “blended homes”, since levels of angst are often raised equally high by the 
torturous process of marrying our belongings.

So many homes put together in maturity are a lesson in how you take two 
disparate sets of belongings and turn them into a harmonious environment. It 
makes you nostalgic for those simple days when you were coupled off young, with 
only the contents of your childhood bedroom to drag along to the marital home: 
a few posters you could roll up and stick under the bed and maybe a photo of 
your first love that you’d stick guiltily in the bottom of your underwear 
drawer. Now there are beds and mirrors, photos and paintings, and none of them 
necessarily to your taste. It makes international diplomacy look like child’s 
play when two otherwise rational adults get down to the business of including 
(and more controversially excluding) each other’s “essential” items.

Having lived through a similar process I can’t say I envy what you are going 
through. How much simpler to dump the lot…

I’ve put a lot of these terms in inverted commas because passions run 
incredibly high, and the paring down of mutual baggage can be fraught with all 
sorts of emotional undercurrents that you only realise you’ve stepped into when 
you’re up to your neck and the histrionics are still building.

Chucking it all out and starting over is probably the most functional choice, 
but that’s far too financially onerous for most of us to consider. Instead we 
try to make do, and often the brilliance of interior design is not in making 
our domestic surroundings look like they’ve sprung fromElle Decoration but in 
making sense of the clutter: the much-loved vase inherited from our dearly 
departed Auntie Marjorie that somehow needs to fit in with the warehouse-style 
machismo of our beloved’s old life.

Having lived through a similar process I can’t say I envy what you are going 
through. How much simpler to dump the lot and embrace minimalism and a clean 
slate. Sadly we are romantic creatures and put far too much weight on what we 
gather along the way and not nearly enough on the joys of travelling light and 
the stress reduction that comes with abandoning our nostalgia for mere stuff.

Sympathy isn’t what you wrote to me looking for, but it’s mostly all I have to 
offer. Along with advice to find patience and a storage unit. Ear-marking what 
you can’t countenance living with is one aspect of the struggle; establishing 
how to eventually remove it from your eyeline can take years and occasionally 
extremes, like the complicity of a “clumsy” visiting friend. As for his renewed 
purchasing vigour, you need to set some guidelines. No purchases of anything in 
public view without prior consultation. Living with another person is challenge 
enough. Being swamped by their objects will only exasperate the challenge.

I’d see your husband’s renewed collecting as a sort of tomcat exercise in 
dominating your combined home. You need to neuter his compulsion before you 
find your surroundings so overbearing you need to move on. Like all fractious 
topics in a committed partnership it will take patience, sternness, a few 
arguments and a couple of tantrums to sort out, though a proper expert would no 
doubt advise tolerance, empathy and compromise.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>
Follow Mariella at @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
