 Most first dates take place in restaurants. God knows why. The terrain is 
hostile. Social hazards abound. Embarrassment and public humiliation lurk 
behind every cruet set and curving waiter's smirk. From spinach on your teeth 
to the sommelier openly laughing at your wine choice, the opportunities for 
date disgrace run deep. Yet until a law is passed decreeing that all first 
dates must take place in sealed rubber rooms, with small tots of horse 
tranquilliser as the only refreshments served, we must all continue to take our 
chances in the great Trattoria de Amore.
Rule number one. Book a table on neutral territory. One of the problems with 
restaurants in this country is that they are not consistent. It is standard for 
standards to slip. On what should be a night to remember, the manager of your 
favourite corner bistro will call your date Susan (your ex-wife's name) and 
forget that you have a fatal nut allergy. It goes without saying they will burn 
the twice-toasted asparagus soufflé you have been raving about, then pour 
burning custard onto your date's lap. You will look like a complete fool, with 
suspect taste to boot. A cannibal with halitosis and an electronic parole tag 
would stand a better chance of a second date than you. So whatever you do, 
insist that your date chooses the venue. When disaster strikes, and it will, it 
is their fault, not yours.

Next. If you have to choose the location, avoid being too obvious. Anywhere 
with a mariachi band or where the man is given the bill while the lady is 
presented with a single red rose is to be avoided. Far too cheesy. Note that 
the only cheese acceptable is on a board next to a pile of crackers or in a 
pizza. Steer clear of places serving sushi or food that necessitates the use of 
chopsticks if you find them challenging. Avoid ordering spaghetti, unless you 
are properly dexterous, for the same reason. People always complain about 
garlic, but coffee breath is far worse, so beware if you have a bad latte 
habit. Oysters are a bit obvious and any sort of sharing platters are fraught 
with danger. You might be interested to hear that fossils of English couples 
politely insisting that the other has the last spring roll/buffalo wing/mini 
sausage were found among the Anglo-Saxon rubble at Sutton Hoo.

Now. This is a delicate matter. There are certain items on the menu that will 
cause flatulence about five hours after consumption. So if you are feeling 
hopeful about your chances of amour, please forgo the Brussels sprout and 
butter bean curry, no matter how tempted you may be. Jerusalem artichokes, 
fresh pasta, kimchi and anything else from the cruciferous family must also be 
approached with caution. Tuna! Who knew? Yet this innocent fish can make 
trumpeting demands upon all of us later.

Drinks. Listen. Shortly after entering the restaurant, should your date 
suggest having a drink, do not reply: 'Yes, let's get battered.' It does not 
create a good impression. By all means have a glass of champagne if you wish, 
but even if you are feeling romantic, do not start the evening suggesting you 
take a drink from each other's glass with interlocked arms. What I am trying to 
say is, please don't act desperate, even if you are. Boys: it is best not to 
get over-excited when you see your favourite Absinthe Blaster - have a Negroni 
instead. So sophisticado! Girls: don't order a pint of wine and a double large 
bowl of chips, even if that's 'what I always have at home at eight o clock'.

I hardly need add that suggestive behaviour from either party is completely 
verboten. If a waiter leaves the restaurant's giant peppermill on your table, 
girls must not toy with it in a manner they hope is seductive. Boys must not 
order sea urchins, and chortle about Jeremy Clarkson's recent remarks comparing 
them to an intimate part of the female anatomy.

It might become obvious that your date is the kind of person who makes you 
want to go home, rip all your clothes off ... and burn them. So always order 
coffee at the end of dinner. Even if you hate the stuff. It stands to reason 
that if you have coffee at the restaurant; neither party is obligated to invite 
the other back to their place. For a coffee, euphemistic or otherwise. Then 
split the bill and split.

3 restaurants for a first date

Ambassade de l'ile
119 Old Brompton Road
London SW7
020 7373 7774

London's newest, poshest French restaurant. The service is formal, a glass of 
champagne costs £14, the menu describes the red mullet as 'aristocratic' and 
the bill is sealed with wax. Perhaps only suitable for the kind of serial 
first-daters with silk handkerchiefs billowing out of blazer pockets.

Scott's
20 Mount Street
London W1
020 7495 7309

Any date would be impressed if you managed to get a table here. Scott's has 
atmosphere and style, plus a gleaming crustacean bar full of goodies. There is 
less conversational pressure for first-daters sitting side by side at a bar. 
Helpful if you run out of anecdotes before the bread basket arrives.

All Star Lanes
Bloomsbury Place
London W1 (and branches) 
020 7025 2676 

Are you insane? Bowling in front of a stranger? Yet some people feel that 
social activity adds to the piquant pleasure of a first date. Obviously, their 
relationships are doomed long before the first ball rolls down the alley. I 
hated All Star Lanes, but it is probably preferable to a karaoke restaurant as 
a first date venue. But only just.

These restaurants and hundreds more are on Jan's restaurant website 
areyoureadytoorder.co.uk <http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk>
