
I get home from the school run and there's a yellow envelope on the floor. I'm 
quite excited – who gets real mail these days? – until I see it is has an 
American stamp and is from Mr M. He is the friend of Uncle Larry who lives in 
Chicago and writes occasionally to tell me how my uncle's dementia is 
progressing. My late father was one of five siblings. He was born in Chicago 
during the depression and his family have remained depressed ever since.

When I was 20 I went to Chicago, and I met Uncle Larry in a hostel for the 
homeless but couldn't meet my remaining aunt (the other one, along with an 
uncle, had died) because she was living rough. With the selfishness of youth, I 
felt sorry for myself that the America of my relatives was so unglamorous. 
After that visit, my uncle wrote occasionally until he developed dementia.

Given this history, I don't have high hopes for Mr M's letter as I stand in 
the hallway holding baby Flora under one arm. It's a good thing that Flora has 
become quite chunky at four months, because as I read, my grip on her tightens. 
The letter tells me that two weeks ago, Uncle Larry died of pneumonia and that 
Mr M sends his condolences. Oh, and six days ago my remaining aunt also died. 
Would I like to pay for their funerals? Otherwise they will get county 
(pauper's) burials. He is sure they would want to be buried as Catholics, and 
sends details of a funeral director. The good news is that there would be a 
small discount for the two of them.

The phrase I don't know whether to laugh or cry was invented for this moment. 
Two years ago, I buried my father, and as he died leaving nothing, I paid for 
his funeral. In some ways it was easier that way – nothing to settle or 
squabble about. But I hadn't planned to provide the same service for the rest 
of his family. The cost given in the letter isn't enough to make me need to 
sell our house (funerals are cheaper than US healthcare) but we do have five 
children to look after. Also there's no will and I have no idea of my aunt or 
uncle's final wishes. I canvass opinion from relatives and friends. "They are 
dead," says A. "There are no relatives to visit their graves. Who are you doing 
this for?"

I'd be doing this for me of course, because what sort of person won't pay to 
bury their relatives? Not to do so would be disrespectful to my father, whose 
ashes are still in the shed, so I have this sense that he knows what's going 
on. Also what would my children think of me if they knew I was humming and 
ha-ing about coughing up for their relatives' funerals?

I decide not to tell the children their great-uncle and great-aunt have died 
because I don't think they knew they had any. Also Lydia, who can summon up 
tears immediately at the memory of "Grandpa Bob" as an angel watching over her 
(though her only memories of him are with dementia in a wheelchair) could 
easily become so upset she can't go to bed.

That evening, Tilly catches me Googling county funerals. They have risen by a 
third since the recession started.

"Why are you looking at a picture of a man in that muddy field carrying a long 
cardboard box?" asks Tilly.

This indeed is what a county funeral is – a burial in a paper box. Finally, I 
find a friend, who says: "Of course you should just pay for their funerals. If 
only so you can sleep at night."

But just as I'm trying to work out whether to send sterling or do a money 
transfer, I get another letter from America. It's from a Catholic organisation 
saying not to worry, they have buried my relatives for me from charitable 
donations. And while I'm terribly grateful, I feel slightly diminished. I feel 
sad that I didn't manage to look after my family myself.
