
An accountant from High Wycombe could become the next baronet of Stichill if 
the UK’s most senior judges rule in his favour in a legitimacy test case 
pioneering the use of DNA to prove aristocratic entitlement.

The seven judges of the judicial committee of the privy council will consider 
on Wednesday whether an affair in a previous generation has tainted the 
bloodline in an attempt to resolve the family discord.

The unusual dispute over the Scottish baronetcy, created by Charles II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/08/charles-ii-dimond-jubilee-president>
 in 1683, has been formally referred to the judicial committee by the Queen. 
The judges are members of the supreme court at Westminster.

The case revolves around legality of the claim to the title by the 10th 
baronet, Sir Steuart Robert Pringle, formerly Commandant General Royal Marines, 
who survived an IRA car bomb in 1981 and died in 2013. His title is disputed 
between his son, Simon Robert Pringle, 56, and a second cousin, Norman Murray 
Pringle, 74. No land or property are attached to the baronetcy.

Analysis of a DNA sample provided by Sir Steuart indicate d his DNA did not 
match that of the Pringle lineage. DNA evidence, however, has not previously 
been used to sort out disagreements over hereditary titles.


A baronetcy is a title granted by the crown; it is not a peerage. Heirs do not 
succeed automatically on the death of the holder and must provide evidence 
proving their relationship to the deceased baronet.


Disputed claims used to be referred to a standing committee of the privy 
council, who then advised the Queen on how cases should be resolved. These rare 
cases are now referred to the judicial committee of the privy council.


If the seven judges – Lord Neuberger, the supreme court president, Lady Hale, 
his deputy, and Lords Mance, Clarke, Reed, Hughes and Hodge – decide to admit 
the DNA evidence, then Norman Murray Pringle, an accountant living in High 
Wycombe, is likely to inherit the title.


The original 17th century grant to Robert Pringle of Stichill was recorded as 
ac heredibus masculis de suo corpore, a Latin phrase translating as “and his 
male heirs from his body”.


The 8th baronet of Stichill, Sir Norman Robert Pringle (1871-1919), was 
married to Florence Madge Pringle, who gave birth to three sons: Norman 
Hamilton Pringle (1903); Ronald Steuart Pringle (1905); and James Drummond 
Pringle (1906).
Norman Hamilton Pringle subsequently assumed the title of the 9th baronet. 
After his death in 1961, his son, Sir Steuart Robert, became the 10th baronet.


Norman Murray Pringle, the applicant in the proceedings, is descended from the 
second son of the 8th baronet. The 8th baronet, it is alleged, was not the 
father of Norman Hamilton Pringle.

