
Gender equality has received global attention in the past month, with 
education campaignerMalala Yousafzai awarded a Nobel peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/10/malala-yousafzai-nobel-peace-prize-voiceless-children>
 and UN goodwill ambassadorEmma Watson’s speech on equality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/oct/03/emma-watsons-un-gender-equality-campaign-is-an-invitation-to-men-too>
. To mark the international day of the girl,we asked students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/sep/30/students-speak-empower-girls-un-emma-watson>
 what action they would propose to empower girls around the world, if they had 
the stage.

We received more than 30 submissions from young people in more than 15 
countries. Ideas included community mentoring programmes, helping women reach 
leadership positions, supporting female farmers and tackling the taboos 
associated with menstruation. Below are our five favourite responses.

Provide low-cost education

Empowering girls completely cannot be done overnight, but I believe a good 
place to start is with granting accessible education to the youth, especially 
in underdeveloped areas. Over the summer I got the chance to be an intern with 
ActionAid in the northern region of Ghana and noticed that a lot of children 
were out of school. Upon further research I realised it was usually due to the 
cost of education. For girls in particular, traditional stereotypes and 
ignorance held them back.

Established in 2008, the Omega schools in Ghana are a chain of low-cost 
primary schools that now boast more than 20,000 students. At 1.5 cedis (£0.28) 
a day for food, tests, uniform and workbooks, this concept is affordable and, 
as demonstrated, achievable. Something similar to this could be done in schools 
in rural areas which are usually neglected, with a focus not just on academics, 
but also global affairs to help eradicate this ignorance. Right from the start, 
discussions should be held on pertinent issues to engage the students and 
ingrain in them principles that they will carry into adulthood. Occasionally, 
parents should be invited to these discussions as well so that the inculcation 
can continue at home. In the long run, educating the future generation will 
help improve living standards, from critical thinkers and by extension 
contribute to the empowerment of women.

Jade Maame Yaa Addae Kankam-Nantwi, SOS Hermann Gmeiner International College, 
Ghana

Eliminate double standards through mentoring

I would mentor them. I would take the time to sit down and have candid and 
hearty one-on-one conversations, girl to girl, woman to woman. I would want 
them to know that they too need to be bold, courageous and fearless, just as 
everybody else, male or female, who defied the odds to follow their dreams.

As an African woman, I know what it is like to grow up in contexts where every 
role is somewhat defined for the girl, yet the boys are allowed to get away 
with almost anything. A girl that becomes pregnant before marriage will be 
scorned and shamed, while boys boast of their manhood. This is the irony of our 
lives.

The playing field for boys and girls in schools, in their careers, in life, 
has not been levelled. Boys are allowed to be bold, and are admired for that, 
girls who are bold, on the other hand, are seen to be bossy, and are told being 
bossy does not look good on them. As girls grow up, society tells them to tone 
it down. Know your place. Submit.

Yet, every child is born free. I would want to let every girl know that they 
too have what it takes to make it in life. I would want them to know that they 
matter and that any day is a good day to be successful!

Alice Muthua, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Norway

There is no silver bullet

I could talk here about providing greater education to girls all across the 
globe, but the truth is that it wouldn’t cover all the issues girls face every 
day. There is no simple or universal solution for the empowerment of girls. 
What good will studying hard do if girls know that when they get into the 
labour market, there is a huge chance that they will have to work harder and 
for less money than their male peers? How can we talk about protecting the 
girlhood, while transgender girls still dread going to a public bathroom? How 
can we empower anyone without acknowledging and addressing factors that 
contribute to discrimination, as race, religion, sexual orientation and social 
and economic status?

I would argue that considering the generational gap between today’s girls and 
adults and the fact that – even in the most democratic societies – access to 
any kind of political power usually only comes with age, we need to stimulate 
the creation of non-judgmental spaces where girls can express aspirations, 
fears, desires and motivations and receive support from adults. They need to 
find in their communities people with the will to translate their needs into 
political activism and to push forward agendas that really matter to them.

Girls need to know that no one but themselves is entitled to their voices or 
their bodies. Having a community backing them up in their choices and actions, 
and empowering their voices is of uppermost importance.

Beatriz Santos Barreto, University of East Anglia, UK

Involve men and boys

After many years and a lot of effort to empower girls and women, it has become 
clear that men need to be included. I would plan outreach campaigns in my local 
county with both boys and girls to discuss the issues girls face just for being 
born girls. I would further solicit ideas on the views of participants on how 
best to handle this issue to protect girls and women against sexual and 
gender-based violence. Now more than ever, men must be included in this 
important conversation of ending violence against girls and women.

Stronger societies will emerge from joint efforts to empower the girl child by 
advocating for protection from those who potentially turn against her – men. 
The invitation has been put out by Emma Watson; I would take that further, go 
local, because whatever decisions are reached in the powerful capitals of the 
world will be futile unless action is followed through in rural areas.

Wanja Munaita, Royal Roads University, Canada

Boost the number of women in power

Empowering young girls will require women to embrace the challenge. Girls 
require role models and guidance. They require the opportunity to see their own 
gender present in the landscape before them. This landscape needs to be of 
women leaders who encourage girls to be equal to men in power and worth, 
unrestricted by gender.

The lack of women in leadership positions, such as politics, has caused 
unequal opportunities. When only men are represented in politics, women 
immediately become excluded from power as well as legislature. Politicians make 
laws based upon their own experiences and beliefs. When these beliefs are male, 
how could females ever be accurately represented or empowered? Females have 
spent years breaking into male-dominated fields, but have yet to fully break 
the ice in the political realm.

Not only are women responsible for these changes, but men as well. The few 
women who have fought their way into politics have been criticised and 
sexualised by the media and political talking heads. Without male support, 
women will continue to fear sex-based judgment and in turn, be discouraged from 
seeking positions of power.

Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, both in and out of 
public leadership positions, need to speak out to young girls and even women. 
They need to give encouragement and show that their opportunities should be no 
different than a males. Men must be equally as encouraging and help to create a 
new generation of girls who could never even imagine feeling or being inferior 
to a man.

Danielle Bryant, Indiana University Bloomington, United States
