
Andy Burnham <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, the health 
secretary, has halted the controversial closure of accident and emergency and 
maternity services at a north London hospital after a vigorous local campaign.

Thousands marched to protest against health authority proposals to close the 
Whittington hospital's two departments, in Archway. Political opponents claimed
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> acted a week before the 
election to save local marginal seats – especially Islington South, which is 
being targeted by both the Tories and the Lib Dems. The high-profile campaign 
to save the hospital generated headlines when notable Whittington patients such 
as radical writer Tariq Ali and actors Steve McFadden (East-Enders' Phil 
Mitchell) and Juliet Stephenson joined the public outcry.

The hospital cutbacks were planned as part of a controversial reorganisation, 
announced last year, which would have affected six hospitals serving more than 
1.2m people. There were also planned cuts at North Middlesex University 
hospital and at Barnet hospital. However Burnham said that he would stop the 
planned consultation for all proposed changes in north centralLondon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

Burnham blamed political opponents for "whipping up emotions" on the streets. 
"There was a political campaign that threatened to destabilise NHS services … 
It's been happening all over the country. The potential destabilisation of the 
A&E service and the hospital in general becomes too much. It comes to a point 
where it is damaging morale and affecting retention of staff in theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>."

However, Burnham said his actions had been prompted because he had not seen 
enough evidence to warrant the closure and the strategic health authority would 
have "to go back to the drawing board".

Andrew Lansley, the shadow health secretary, said: "This is a welcome U-turn 
by Andy Burnham. Many others called for a stop to the flawed plans by NHS 
London to shut down local hospital units months ago, and he accused me of 
resisting change. He has now completely caved in."

One hundred of the hospital's consultants and the British Medical Association 
had opposed the plan.

The minister said: "As a government we only support changes in the NHS when 
the local clinicians propose them and when there is evidence that they will 
improve quality and save lives."

The overhaul of health services was designed to reduce the amount of work done 
in hospitals in favour of either specialist centres, centres of excellence or 
24-hour urgent care centres – a vision outlined by Labour health minster Lord 
Darzi in 2008. It was also meant to help avoid a potential London NHS budget 
deficit of up to £860m by 2015.
