
I took a while to tell my colleagues that I was studying for a PhD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> in my spare time. I 
was concerned that they might question my ability to balance a full-time (and 
full-on) career with doctoral studies in a topic completely unrelated to the 
industry I work in.


But I began to realise that, although the topic I am exploring is not directly 
connected, the skills I am acquiring are hugely valuable. The process has given 
me new perspectives and added value in ways I had not expected.

My approach to innovation has evolved, for example, as I apply academic 
questioning and analysis to business problems. I have completely refined my 
prioritisation skills. And mentoring graduates and helping them to realise 
their potential has inspired me to solidify my own thinking about progression.

Studying part-time for a doctorate can be a lonely experience; I have met only 
a small number of people in the same position. What’s more, there isn’t a huge 
amount of advice on the topic, so here are lessons I have learned about 
managing it so far:

Choose a topic that you love 

Your choice of subject has to be so appealing that you can keep yourself 
motivated for the duration of your studies, in the face of the stresses and 
strains of work. This project may take six years (or more), so it needs a topic 
that you can’t leave alone. I’ve come to realise that much of a PhD is just 
getting through it, proving to yourself that you can persist and keep going.

Find the right supervisor and the right programme

Before you begin, it’s important to spend a significant amount of time finding 
the right supervisor – someone who can appreciate and support your approach. 
They will need to understand your priorities and your study pattern, which is 
likely to involve short bursts of activity. Look for someone experienced and 
who can understand your end goals. You are CEO of your project, so choose your 
supervisory team well, just as you would do in business.

Set the ground rules

Agree the minimum face-to-face and remote contact required with your 
supervisor. Document a clear plan of work and activities to reassure people 
around you – your supervisor and your colleagues – that you are in control.

Take real holidays 

Much of the leave I take from work is focused on catching up on studying, but 
a break away from everything helps to clear the mind and restore the balance 
between work, study, home, family and friends.

Accept support

Help is there if you look for it and are open to receive it. Once I started 
being more open about what I was doing, the support I received from my 
colleagues hugely increased.

Only do what you need to

Accept that you cannot do everything. If your studies are not intended to 
further your career, you don’t have to give papers, or participate in teaching 
unless you want to. You need to be clear about the reasons for pursuing your 
studies. If it is not for a career in academia, then why put yourself under 
that extra pressure?

Value yourself


Work out how your studies will make you different – value the unique 
perspective they will enable you to bring to your organisation. Being able to 
articulate the extra benefits that you bring to your role may be useful if you 
need leniency around working hours or have to ask for study leave. There are 
more options than ever before to study remotely or part-time. Pursuing 
something that you are really interested in can be intensely fulfilling and 
help you to move towards a rounded and holistic approach to life.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
