
A night at the infamous Chateau Marmont, which rises above the Sunset Strip 
like a leviathan of gothic glamour, is part of the quintessential Hollywood 
experience. Actors, musicians, writers and the affluent elite have all been 
known to hole up in this legendary paparazzi-free zone in order to revel in 
romantic rebellion. Indeed, many guests even became habitués in order to blaze 
a trail with reckless abandon seven days a week.

The tales from the Chateau have become so legendary that anyone with even a 
passing interest in rock'n'roll – or any facet of the entertainment industry 
for that matter – will have heard a Hollywood story related to Chateau Marmont. 
If you think you haven't, maybe this by no means comprehensive list will jog 
your memory.James Dean hopped through a window to audition for Rebel Without a 
Cause;Judy Garland sang by the grand piano in the lobby; Canyon cowboy Gram 
Parsons lived here for a short time; Blues Brother John Belushi overdosed in 
bungalow number three;Led Zeppelin drove their Harley Davidsons into the hotel 
lobby;The Doors' Jim Morrison dangled precariously from his window; esteemed 
record producerRick Rubin lived here for nine months in the 1990s after 
relocating from New York;John Frusciante, guitarist with Red Hot Chili Peppers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/redhotchilipeppers>, took up residence here 
in 1996, only to descend into a drugs hell that nearly claimed his life;Anthony 
Kiedis, also of Chili Peppers, recorded his vocals for By the Way in his room 
at the hotel;Ville Valo of Finnish rock band HIM, recorded his vocals for the 
track Song Or Suicide here;Lindsay Lohan checked in following her arrest for 
drink driving in 2007;Lily Allen wrote the song Fuck You while at the hotel; 
Heath Ledger partied here the week before he died … Deep breath.

As Harry Cohn, founder of Columbia Pictures, once said: "If you must get in 
trouble, do it at Chateau Marmont." However, it should be noted that Frusciante 
was kicked out of the hotel when the extent of his drug-induced atrophy was 
revealed by a journalist from the New Times LA.

But what of the actual hotel? Well, despite being steeped in rock'n'roll 
notoriety, it can actually offer much tranquillity. Modelled on a chateau in 
France's Loire Valley, the Marmont is at once luxe and unique. The pool area, 
which is accessed via a locked gate and hidden from The Strip behind lush 
vegetation, is serene and could certainly help you gain relative repose after a 
night of debauchery down on said Strip. The sumptuous lobby lounge is equally 
relaxing and, as the sun sets, casting long shadows across the dining patio, 
it's easy to just sink into a plush chair, savour the ambience and be seduced 
by the raffish glamour. That said, the Bar Marmont is a great place to do some 
celeb-spotting after you've sampled the Chateau's gastronomic delights.
 A hillside bungalow at Chateau Marmont 
Aside from the 63 rooms, the hotel also boasts garden cottages, hillside and 
poolside bungalows, and penthouses, all of which offer their guests total 
anonymity. So, tempting as it might be to run up to Val Kilmer and ask for an 
autograph, it is highly recommended that you don't. I'm speaking from 
experience here – sorry to have disturbed you, Scarlett.

Anyway, instead of ogling other celebrities for your entire stay, why not give 
in to your own inner rock star and make use of the 24-hour room service and 
in-room massage service. If you really want to go Hollywood A-List, stay in 
room 64, the two-bedroom penthouse (used by Howard Hughes so he could spy on 
starlets down at the pool). It has a marble hallway and an enormous wrap-around 
terrace overlooking the Strip. It just happens to be Bono's favourite room, too.
• Doubles from $415 plus tax, +1 323 656 1010, chateaumarmont.com 
<http://www.chateaumarmont.com>

Rock & Roll Hotels (Punk Publishing, £10.95, is available from 4 October (
rocknrollhotels.co.uk <http://www.rocknrollhotels.co.uk/>). For more about the 
author seefacebook.com/RocknRollHotels 
<https://www.facebook.com/RocknRollHotels>
