
So there I was, happily weary from a day's cycling, sitting in a stone-flagged 
kitchen being furnished with a stream of expertly made hot whiskeys, my glass 
resting on the very table on which was born a well-known Hollywood actor. Who 
would have thought that an evening in unfashionable Omagh could give so much 
pleasure?

Well, certainly very few tourists. Examine Ireland from the air and you'll 
notice a mysterious network of lines that links Dublin, Cork, Kerry and 
Connemara. These are not ley lines or long forgotten Druidic highways but 
merely well worn paths left by millions of visitors for whom the rest of 
Ireland outside the four honeypots might just as well not exist. This is good 
news, of course, because it leaves the rest of the country, and its kitchen 
tables, emptier for the rest of us to explore. Take your bike on Sustrans's 
North West Trail (northwest-trail.com <http://www.northwest-trail.com>), for 
example, and you'll have huge stretches of its 200-mile circuit to yourself.

The fantastically well-signposted route slides from the republic to the 
province and back again, mainly on little back roads, giving cyclists a taste 
of no fewer than six counties – Donegal, Tyrone, Fermanagh, Cavan (briefly), 
Leitrim and Sligo.

And for Sligo read WB Yeats country. It took just two minutes from my arrival 
at Sligo station for Ireland's greatest poet and philanderer to catch my eye. 
His unexpectedly groovy statue depicts him as a cross between Mick Jagger, a 
country parson and a large impact-flattened balloon, but is good for all that. 
A few miles later the trail passes the ground of a village football team – 
worth watching, if only for the pleasure of yelling, "Up and at 'em, Yeats 
United!".

The coastline hereabouts has not a little poetry of its own as it carves its 
way carefully around the foot of the fearsome Benbulben mountain, but its 
choicest moment comes at Rossnowlagh beach, where the trail leaves the tarmac 
for a spin on the sands. When I arrived the sea was festooned with surfers 
heedless of the showers coming in from the Atlantic. Showers that became a 
downpour as I entered Donegal, so I hastily took refuge in the town's castle.
 Yeats United's home ground. Photograph: Dixe Wills 
As you strike north-east from the town, there is little friendly about the 
climb up to Barnesmore Gap, which is marked by what seems a limitless 
succession of false summits. Once you're up, however, the 10-mile descent to 
the town of Stranorlar via Meenglass Forest makes it all worthwhile. With a 
double rainbow arcing over me, I stopped to watch as hundreds of rooks swirled 
around a darkening sky.

And if County Tyrone hasn't twinned itself with Sussex yet, it can only be a 
matter of time. I exchanged Donegal's mountains and general unruliness for 
Tyrone's gently undulating fields and an all-round diminution in scale, with 
only the Sperrin mountains to the east hinting at something grander.

Parking my bike in the high street of the county town, Omagh, I walked the 
historic town trail and let its grand municipal architecture win me over before 
I retired to Mullaghmore House, a Georgian B&B complete with steam room, 
billiards room and early Victoriana including a bath so vast I took the 
precaution of listening to the shipping forecast before launching myself into 
it. It was Sam Neill who was born on the Mullaghmore kitchen table, by the way. 
He still keeps in touch too, which is nice.

Passing through Enniskillen and Florence Court Forest Park, the trail climbs 
punishingly into the northern foothills of the Cuilcagh mountains to the 
stalactitastic Marble Arch Caves (028 6634 8855,marblearchcaves.net 
<http://www.marblearchcaves.net>, adults £8.50, under-18s £5.50). Here a young 
guide called Niall explained to me how two daring speleologists discovered the 
system in 1895 by floating down an underground river on a folding canvas canoe. 
Less hazardously, an electric boat now slips along on a section of the 
extraordinary 35 miles of passages and chambers that have since been mapped.

And so onwards to Sligo. One of the great advantages of cycling the circuit 
clockwise from here is that you can spend your last night at Ard Nahoo, an 
eco-cabinned health farm at Dromahair, a village just 15 miles shy of the 
finish line. Since by then my leg muscles had the consistency of sump oil, you 
might imagine with what relish I anticipated the next morning's sauna, hot tub 
and massage. As Yeats might have said: "Knead softly because you knead on my 
thighs."
