
What will I learn?
Anatomy and physiology degrees are for those who are fascinated by the science 
of medicine, but don't fancy becoming doctors.

In study terms, this means you'll learn about the structure of the body and 
how it functions. You'll gain an understanding of the causes, diagnosis and 
treatment of disease, and how they affect different parts of the body. You 
could learn, for example, how cells develop, how limbs form in the right 
places, and even how muscle groups are used in different sports. You may also 
touch on hot topics such as cell cloning, bioinformatics, genetic engineering, 
and perhaps even the impact of malaria or HIV on a human being.

If you're taking this course, chances are you'll be interested in researching 
your own ideas, which is a good thing because most courses will include a hefty 
research project in the final year. Produce a good final paper and it could be 
the start of a career in academia.

What skills will I gain?
You should walk away from a degree with an excellent knowledge of how the body 
works, and an understanding of the biology, genetics, immunology, pharmacology 
and disease processes.

Investigating some of the more high-profile – which usually means 
controversial – areas of this field, such as genomics or food safety, you 
should be able to debate the pros and cons of the issues and to articulate an 
argument.

You'll have a working knowledge of how diseases develop and how this affects 
the function of the body, as well as being able to identify risks –
if you spray a field with a certain chemical, could it damage eyesight, for 
example – and how they can be prevented.

The research project will demonstrate you have the academic skills to 
accomplish all of these things – identify an area to study, present your 
findings clearly and articulate the results – as well as those crucial soft 
skills, such as independent thinking, the ability to work in a team and 
commitment.

What job can I get?
If you loved the research side of your course, then a career in science 
research could be right up your street. This will require extra study, but you 
will be able to specialise in an area of particular interest. This doesn't 
necessarily mean you need to stay in a university, because pharmaceutical 
companies, charities and government departments, among others, need researchers.

Teaching is another option, either as a university lecturer or in a school, 
which would please the government no end as it often bemoans the lack of good 
science teachers and is concerned about the drop in the number of students 
getting excited by the subject.

What will look good on the CV?
• The ability to demonstrate laboratory skills and planning experiments.
• The ability to execute independent research.
• The ability to analyse and interpret data.
• The ability to demonstrate motivation for, and interest in, the subject 
matter covered, perhaps by completing a project outside of schoolwork in a 
relevant field, or by making a submission to an essay-writing competition about 
something of interest in the area, or by undertaking a placement in a research 
laboratory.
