
Tech companies including Twitter, Google and Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> are facing a wave of legal 
actions in Ireland because of their decision to base their international 
operations in the country, a leading libel lawyer has said.

Paul Tweed told the Guardian his firm Johnsons had seen a “steady, if not 
dramatic, increase in claims against Facebook,Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> and Twitter” as well as other 
social networks. He said there were several new claims a week on issues 
including privacy, libel and harassment.

Tweed said the increase in claims was down to a combination of more people 
using social media in a vindictive way, coupled with the realisation that those 
companies basing their operations inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, largely to take advantage of its 
low rate of corporation tax, could face sanction under Irish law.


He warned three years ago that large tech firms were increasingly open to 
challenges in Irish courts, but says the number of claims has recently ramped 
up.

Tweed, who has represented famous clients including Britney Spears, Louis 
Walsh, Harrison Ford and Michael Jackson, predicts a “flurry of activity” in 
the coming months and expects “landmark” legal cases to make it to Ireland’s 
courts.


However, he said the prospect of legal action was likely to spur companies 
such as Facebook to co-operate on new voluntary takedown procedures.

“If they don’t they will find themselves at the wrong end of civil law in 
terms of major damage claims,” he said.

“The bottom line is that Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, Facebook et al have created 
these social networking beasts for their commercial gain and therefore the onus 
must be firmly on them to provide effective controls that give more than lip 
service to public concerns.

“They cannot have it all their own way. They have come to Ireland, which has 
to be good news for our economy, but they cannot expect to take all the 
benefits and escape the legal and other consequences.”

The prospect of legal action targeting the international subsidiaries of US 
tech companies in Ireland adds another dimension to concerns about how the 
global nature of the internet undermines domestic law on issues such as privacy.

Last month the UK supreme court upheld an injunction barring UK publications 
from naming the couple involved in the “celebrity threesome”, despite the names 
being published by numerous outlets in the US and elsewhere outside England and 
Wales.

On the day of the ruling, Twitter emailed a users who had posted tweets about 
the couple, saying it had received legal notices claiming they were illegal and 
asking the user to confirm if they had “voluntarily” deleted them.

Google was also recently compelled by the EU to make sure links removed under 
the “right to be forgotten” rules were not accessible from browsers in its 
member countries, even if they were on versions of the site aimed at users 
elsewhere.
