
No doubt Nick Jones, the owner of private members’ club Soho House, will do a 
good job of making over Kettner’s, now closed for refurbishment. When it 
reopens in 2018, doubtless the restaurant will seem 10 times more 
sophisticated, if a touch ersatz. But still, I can’t help feeling mournful at 
the thought of the old place standing silent, even if only temporarily.In the 
days when it was operated by Pizza Express 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/nov/28/kettners-restaurants-soho-jay-rayner>
– since 2008, it has been some kind of French brasserie – it was a favourite 
haunt of mine, its restaurant affordable, its champagne bar an excellent place 
for trysts and job interviews alike. Actually, long ago, I was interviewed for 
a job on this newspaper there. I didn’t get it: drinking and talking coherently 
at the same time is not part of my skill set. But it’s not my failure I 
remember, so much as the way Kettner’s dusty glamour managed to convince me I 
was utterly fascinating and headed straight for the top.

Opened by Auguste Kettner, once a chef to Napoleon III, in 1867, it was, 
famously, one of the places where Edward VII liked to meet his mistress, Lillie 
Langtry, being close to the theatres where she worked, with only moderate 
success, as an actress. Kettner’s itself claims the king built a tunnel linking 
the restaurant, in Romilly Street, with the Palace Theatre on Cambridge Circus, 
the better that the couple could meet in the interval. But this seems unlikely 
to me. It wasn’t as if the king hid his relationship. Even after they were no 
longer lovers, he pointedly attended her first nights.

But I digress. When psycho-geography makes its big comeback, everyone finally 
having tired of books about badgers and eagles, I hope one of its hip 
practitioners will think about riffing on restaurants, pretentiously or 
otherwise, in the course of their urban ramblings. To me, they’re every bit as 
interesting as overgrown railway sidings and 1960s tower blocks. The old ones 
come with so many stories, true and untrue; the new ones speak volumes about 
aspiration, gentrification, immigration and fashion. If J Alfred Prufrock could 
measure out his life in coffee spoons, most of us can reckon up ours in 
restaurants, from Berni Inns (posh table mats and two button mushrooms with 
everything) to hipster dining rooms (exposed pipes and monk’s beard with 
everything).

The first restaurant I remember was the Golden Egg in Fargate, Sheffield, a 
branch of the 1970s chain that was a hangover from the 1950s coffee bar. It had 
a riotous yellow colour scheme and vinyl seats; the room was always fuggy, the 
windows steamed up, as if you’d unaccountably strolled into an episode of 
Whatever Happened to the Likely Lads? But I can’t – this is odd – remember 
anything I ate there. After this, there was indeed the Berni Inn, where I 
celebrated my ninth birthday with a rump steak and a pudding from a trolley. 
The first Indian restaurant I ever visited was called Nirmal’s (poppadoms and 
prawn purees); the first Chinese, Canton Orchard (“seaweed” and a weird 
“edible” – ha – basket in which there languished gloopy prawns and water 
chestnuts). When I got a place at university, my father took me to the poshest 
restaurant for miles around, the Old Vicarage at Ridgeway. There, I tried 
venison for the first time, and got very drunk.

The pace stepped up when I came to London. The city wasn’t so crazily 
expensive then, and even on a tiny salary, I could afford to eat out. Among the 
places, now extinct, from the 1990s that I still think of are 192 and First 
Floor in Notting Hill, and a place called Helter Skelter in Brixton. Were there 
puy lentils? I believe there were. Quaglino’s, the 1930s nightspot which 
Terence Conran reopened in 1993, is still with us, but in a repulsively vulgar 
incarnation aimed (it seems to me) exclusively at oligarchs. But it was great 
back in the day, a fantasy of louche-ness no wage slave could hope to resist.

Oh dear. It’s all so piercingly nostalgic. I do wonder, though, if someone 
hasn’t kept menus from all these and other places – and ashtrays, plates, 
napkins, old signs. Have they? As the first museum in the world to provide a 
restaurant for its visitors, it seems to me the V&A should think about a 
restaurant exhibition, or even a permanent gallery, without delay. How the 
crowds would flock. In its displays, they would find their younger selves, 
gorging on dishes that, though easy to mock now, seemed unimprovably delicious 
at the time: a taste of modernity, with all the grinning contentment that 
dubious word implies.
