
The chief inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw, has said too many 
apprenticeships are of poor quality and fail to provide the skills and 
knowledge that employers need.


Launching an Ofsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> report, 
Wilshaw said it was “little short of a disaster” that only 5% of youngsters 
took up apprenticeships at the age of 16, and accused schools of failing to 
prepare pupils for the world of work.

“Our report today lays bare what many have long suspected,” he told a meeting 
of the CBI in the West Midlands. “Despite the increase in numbers, very few 
apprenticeships are delivering the professional, up-to-date skills in the 
sectors that need them most.


“Employers and providers involved in poor-quality, low-level apprenticeships 
are wasting public funds. They are abusing the trust placed in them by 
government and apprentices to deliver meaningful, high-quality training.”

The report argues that a government drive to create apprenticeships in ever 
greater numbers has resulted in the quality of courses on offer being diluted 
and the “apprenticeship brand” being devalued.

It says too many low-skilled roles are being classed as apprenticeships and 
are being used to accredit people who have been in a job for some time. In some 
cases individuals were not even aware they were doing apprenticeships.

The report says the bulk of apprenticeships have been created in sectors such 
as customer service, retail, administration and care, and too few provide the 
advanced professional-level skills needed in sectors with shortages.

The number of 16-18 year olds being taken on as apprentices is as low today as 
it was a decade ago, with most places going to those over 25. Even where 
schools do prepare young people for work, careers advice is failing to 
encourage enough them into vocational routes, Wilshaw argued.

“Too many of our FE providers have focused for too long on equipping 
youngsters with dubious qualifications of little economic relevance. And too 
many employers have not engaged with schools or organised themselves 
effectively to make the apprenticeship system work.

“Being an apprentice should be a badge of honour. The reforms now working 
their way through the system are commendable. But we are kidding ourselves if 
we think our good intentions are enough. We have won the argument over the 
value of apprenticeships. We have yet to make them a sought-after and valid 
alternative career choice for hundreds of thousands of young people.”

Wilshaw called for “urgent, joined-up action” by schools, employers and FE and 
skills providers to help raise the quality of all apprenticeships.

Brian Lightman, general secretary of the Association of School and College 
Leaders (ASCL), said it was wrong to blame schools. “Apprenticeships need to be 
rigorous programmes of learning planned collaboratively by employers and 
education professionals with clear and explicit progression routes into 
employment.

“However, blaming schools for lack of provision of information about 
apprenticeships will get us nowhere with this important priority. Careers 
services have been decimated in recent years and funding removed and it is 
incredibly difficult for schools to gain accurate access to full information 
about what is available and the quality of that provision.”

Mary Bousted, general secretary of the Association of Teachers and Lecturers 
(ATL), said: “Government rhetoric would have us believe that apprenticeships 
are the answer for the many young people who will be unable to access 
vocational education as a result of the swingeing cuts to further education. 
This report makes clear however, that poor-quality apprenticeship programmes 
are still being offered to our young people..”

Kevin Courtney, deputy general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, 
called on the government to reverse funding cuts for post-16 education. “The 
government’s focus on an academic core curriculum, represented by the EBacc and 
A-level reform, has resulted in a weak policy for vocational and technical 
alternatives for 14-19-year-olds,” he said.

 “It is of huge importance that apprenticeships offered to young people are 
high quality, properly paid and lead to meaningful qualifications and work 
prospects. Headline-grabbing announcements for three million new 
apprenticeships have clearly led to a dilution of quality in the pursuit of an 
arbitrary and futile bid to achieve target numbers.”

The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, called for an emphasis on quality 
rather than quantity. “One in three providers visited by Ofsted for this report 
were failing to deliver high-quality training to their apprentices, and there 
is a danger that the government’s target of three million apprenticeships could 
lead to an increase in poor-quality provision,” she said.
