
Three children, dressed in smart white shirts, troop past the giant tub of 
lard and pause next to the display of glass eyes. "Vas a entrar?" asks one. 
They glance at each other, pull aside the velvet rope and enter the world at 
the back of 826 Valencia. Somewhere behind a curtain, an adult's voice can be 
heard. "I am a person." There is some giggling. "I led the way through the 
fog." More giggling. "I am an animal?" Squealing. "I am a place?"

To enter the world at the back of 826 Valencia, you have to know what you are 
looking for. Like the entrance to a speakeasy, 826 Valencia has a front. In its 
case, the front is a perfectly respectable, entirely normal, pirate shop. There 
are the pirate flags, the Jolly Rogers, the ensigns, eye patches, crutches and 
peg legs so necessary to the everyday life of the seafaring outlaw. There are 
signs to post around the ship to ensure good order and the measured pursuit of 
other people's riches:

1. No whistling

2. No forgetting to swab

3. Fighting only on port side

But there is something amiss. Though pirates spend long hours bobbing around 
waiting for the next ship of fortune to materialise, they are not known as 
voracious readers. Yet here are piles of books, pamphlets, magazines, reviews, 
journals, and anthologies.

The bustle of activity beyond the velvet rope, and the constant stream of 
children passing through the shop at 4.30 on a weekday afternoon, betray the 
lie: this is not a real pirate shop. Those are not authentic glass eyes. That 
is not true lardy lard. A man standing next to me, sharing my thoughts, sticks 
his hand into the tub, then tries to scrape the white goo from his fingers. 
"What is it?" I ask him. "Lard," he replies.

The real business here is words. Set up three years ago by the writer Dave 
Eggers <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dave-eggers> and some friends, 826 
Valencia in San Francisco's Mission district is a drop-in centre for 
schoolchildren looking for extra help with homework, a bit of peace and quiet, 
or a chance to listen to a good story.

The place has been so successful that it has spawned imitators: New York City 
has one in Brooklyn (the front is a superhero supplies shop, where the 
aerodynamic qualities of capes can be tested using an industrial fan), Los 
Angeles and Michigan have them, and others are imminent in Chicago and Seattle. 
Massachusetts and Cincinnati have centres modelled on 826.

But that is only part of the story. Eggers, along with two colleagues, has 
also edited an oral history book, Teachers Have It Easy. It describes, with 
sometimes startling explicitness, their daily lives. Sure, there's the 
teaching, the long days, the constant pressure of being on the job. But other 
things truly shock: the teachers who mow lawns at weekends or paint houses to 
make ends meet. The teacher who works in a bar to buy books for his class. If 
you want an easy life, the book explains in an easy-to-follow chart, become a 
pharmaceuticals salesman, not a teacher.

The book's theme is an old teachers' favourite: pay. It makes a compelling 
case for investment in education to be put in the pockets of the teachers. Pay 
them, it argues, and their wealth shall trickle down into the community, the 
economy and the future. It is hard to disagree.

Wearing sandals, shorts and a brown sweater flecked with what might be dust, 
Eggers looks on as children aged from seven to 14 find a space at one of the 
large tables and quietly get on with their work. "This is really kind of 
mellow," Eggers says, sad, blue eyes peering from beneath a baseball cap. "I 
have to say, this is like a model day, everyone working diligently."

Now 35, Eggers found renown with his first book, A Heartbreaking Work of 
Staggering Genius. Nominally the story of his efforts to raise his younger 
brother following the death of his parents, it almost lived up to its billing. 
He has put the success to admirable use, spawning an array of mainly literary 
projects. He tells me that 826 Valencia has 800 volunteer tutors signed up, 
poised to offer one-to-one help to whoever chooses to drop in, or to visit a 
school to conduct a workshop.

One of the centre's biggest hits is a character named Mr Blue. Mr Blue lives, 
heard but not seen, through a hatch at the top of a ladder in 826 Valencia. Mr 
Blue devours stories. Every day, he must have a new one. And every story must 
be the best, most ingenious story ever told. The children visiting 826 have to 
write it.

"The kids sit facing the white board and collectively tell a story," Eggers 
explains, his arms cartwheeling with enthusiasm. "As they're coming up with the 
story, there's a typist sitting here, so they see their words coming up on the 
wall."

When the story is almost complete, the collective process stops, and each 
child writes their own ending. They illustrate the stories. An author 
photograph is taken for the back cover. The books are printed and bound and 
delivered to the fearsome Mr Blue. "Mr Blue is never seen, because he's 600lbs 
and covered in boils," explains Eggers. "The kids freak out. Any kid this age 
would believe it."

Mr Blue takes his time perusing each submission before giving the work a 
thudding stamp of approval. Each child goes home with a book written by 
themselves. The sessions are booked up a year ahead.

Eggers's first experience of working with schoolchildren came through the 
short-lived satirical magazine Might, the sort of publication that would have 
poked fun at the earnest intentions of 826 Valencia.

Might hosted workshops for high school children, where they would be shown the 
basics of magazine publishing. "The kids, all public school students, absorbed 
everything really quickly and we all had a blast," Eggers writes in an email 
the day after we meet. "That experience loomed pretty large in my mind when 
thinking of 826: the power of putting young professionals in the media world 
(as I guess we were) next to high school students."

He insists 826 Valencia and its imitators, some operating as franchises, 
others independently, are a necessary part of school education. "Until all 
public schools' class sizes are drastically reduced, or until they can provide 
one-on-one tutoring until 6pm every night," he writes, "I think there's always 
going to be room for neighbourhood drop-in centres. I think there should be one 
in every urban neighbourhood, or wherever the students are falling behind."

Sitting in the cramped building next to 826 that is home to several other 
Eggers-inspired endeavours - the literary quarterly McSweeney's, a monthly 
review called The Believer, a couple of publishing imprints - Eggers is both 
shy and intense as he talks about his reasons for crossing from tutoring to 
writing a book on education policy.

The son of a teacher, his interest was spurred when a childhood friend became 
a science teacher. "She was the first person in my group that had a real 
career," he says. "We were all madly jealous because she was so dedicated, so 
together. She was more inspired, and had more love for what she did on a daily 
basis, than any of us combined.

"She taught for about five years, and then she had to quit. She'd been living 
in the same apartment with a friend for six years, making tiny little raises 
every year, and she started seeing other people she knew having their own 
apartment or owning a car, all of these different luxuries that people might 
graduate to, and she could not do any of those things. So she quit and went 
into educational software and made three times as much in a year."

Her story is typical of those in the book: dedicated professionals are worn 
down and eventually forced out of the careers they love, not only by lack of 
money, but by the lack of respect afforded to the profession.

The need for teachers to take summer jobs, or second jobs, argues Eggers, 
demeans them. "What does that say to the students of that town? Do they have a 
lot of respect for their teacher, for the profession? What is their stature in 
their community?"

The issue of teachers' pay, he believes, transcends partisan politics. But the 
introduction of President Bush's No Child Left Behind act, and changes that 
have seen tables and testing take precedence over learning, clearly anger him.

"There's more restrictions," he says. "They make them teach for the test, 
which combined with less pay and less creativity [means] you attract a 
different crowd. The person that goes into teaching now, with the average 
starting salary of $26,000 ... you have a lot of saints, who maybe otherwise 
would go into the priesthood or a nunnery.

"Almost all of them say, yes, they want better money, but they say first what 
they want is respect and freedom to be a creative professional. And when you 
take away both sides of it, I don't know who you have left."

The degradation of school finances opens the way for corporate involvement, 
and while Eggers is adamant that no solution should be overlooked, he harbours 
a mistrust of corporate America.

"I don't like corporate involvement and I think it's really creepy when they 
want their name on the scoreboard. And Coke doesn't want Pepsi to be in the 
school, whatever, it creeps me out."

He tells the story of a McDonald's initiative. A teacher would work for a day 
at a McDonald's."And all the kids could come and see their teacher at 
McDonald's and order their food from them. The kids loved it because they got 
to see their teacher in a new context and McDonald's would be full that day 
with the class. You'd think that it's going to be worth it if there's a lot of 
money. I thought, all right, $50,000, minimum. And then the amount of money was 
like $612. What's so depressing is how cheap the schools sell themselves."

Back in 826, the pirate shop has closed for the evening, the small children 
have gone home, to be replaced by a group of teenagers working on yet another 
Eggers project, the Best American Non-required Reading group.

The students sit around a table. Before them lies an assortment of magazines 
and journals with dubious-sounding names and very probably dubious-looking 
readerships: Conjunctions, Agni 61, Watchword, Fugue, Zyzzyva.

The 10 students are charged with reading just about everything published in 
the US in a given year before distilling it all down to 25 pieces which are 
published in an anthology. Contributors range from the unknown to the 
overexposed. This year's edition has a celebrity foreword by Beck.

"Who's got the Paris Review?" asks Eggers. "It's under a new editor."

"Do you have an email for Spin yet?" a student asks him.

Eggers loads me up with publications before I leave: copies of the 826 
quarterly of original writings from the centre's workshops, an oral history 
about immigration called I Might Get Somewhere, Waiting to be Heard, a 
collection of writings by young people about the violent world they live in. It 
is a humbling and inspiring collection.

"I'd rather people just borrow the idea and do their own thing in their own 
community," Eggers writes the following day when I inquire if he is setting up 
a franchise operation. "Whenever people can just start on their own, without 
our imprimatur, all the better. The model works, but we don't own the patent."
