
First came the instructions. It was recommended that I call her by her 
honorific, Doctor.

Also: she would typically retire to her bedroom no later than 10pm. I would be 
wise to follow suit. I can’t recall exactly why I – a mere journalist writing 
a profile for a Sunday paper – was invited overnight as a guest ofMaya Angelou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mayaangelou>, but you don’t turn down such 
offers. So there I was, late in the summer of 2003, on a guided tour of her 
garden in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, hoping that my spotty research (I’d 
had to speed-read her autobiography,I Know Why The Caged Bird Sings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/11/maya-angelou-caged-bird-poetry-power>
, on the flight from New York) did not give me away as a dilettante.

We sat in her gazebo as Angelou talked about the wonder of discovering 
Shakespeare, Dickens and Burns as a child. She was shortly due to fly to 
Scotland to mark Burns Night, and I’ve a vivid memory of nursing a second or 
third glass of Johnnie Walker Blue (her drink of choice) while she entertained 
me with a reading of “A Man’s A Man For A’ That”. She loved Burns and 
identified with him deeply, recalling how his poems reached out to her through 
the tide of misery and injustice that washed over her childhood, restoring 
a sense of self-worth and dignity. As she talked, the night descended, the 
drone of insects filled the air.

We drove to Duke University the next day, a journey of about 90 minutes in a 
chauffeur-driven car, liberally fortified by Johnnie Walker Blue and several 
bottles of Angelou’s favourite white wine, Chateau Ste Michelle. She was 
delivering the convocation address for first-year students, a longstanding 
tradition, for which I was given a front-row seat in the university’s enormous 
chapel. In streamed the students, a sea of glossy young faces awaiting the 
legend. FinallyMaya Angelou <https://www.theguardian.com/books/mayaangelou> 
emerged from behind the chancel to generous applause. Slowly she made her way 
towards the lectern; slowly she lifted her face to the expectant crowd, and 
slowly she spoke: “The last time I came to Duke I received a standing ovation,” 
she said in that rich, sonorous voice that compels attention. “Let’s try again, 
shall we.”

And with that, Angelou exited into the recess of the chapel, gave her 
perplexed audience a few seconds to prepare, and walked back on – this time to 
a standing ovation. Thus buoyed up, she began her speech – a recitation of “The 
Gambler”, the song immortalised by country singer Kenny Rogers – much as a 
preacher might deliver a sermon. No irony was involved. We were congregants in 
a church.

Angelou believed that everything was poetry – a popular radio hit was as valid 
as a Shakespeare sonnet. Nothing about her was elitist – but Dr Angelou put a 
high premium on respect. Woe betide anyone who forgot it.
