
'We have snails," declared the sign in the Mercado da Ribeira. Sure enough the 
stall was piled with net bags full ofcaracóis, destined for some of Lisbon's 
countless tavernas, where the chewy little morsels are a popular snack, 
especially in summer, washed down with a coldimperiais (draught beer).

The snails were the first surprise on my foodie tour of the city, which 
started at the huge covered market in the slightly down-at-heel district of 
Cais do Sodré. My guides were Célia Pedroso and her business partner Filomena 
Pinto, who together runEatDrinkWalk <http://eatdrinkwalk.com/lisbon/>, offering 
gastronomic tours of the city on foot.

"There is so much more to Lisbon than salt cod and custard tarts," said Célia, 
as we wandered past stalls piled with plump fruit and vegetables and glistening 
trays of monkfish, eel, octopus, scabbard fish and more. As the cheapest place 
in the city to buy fresh produce, the Mercado is popular with chefs and locals, 
but few tourists venture in. That is likely to change: there are plans for an 
open-plan restaurant and tapas bar area, to make the market into an attraction 
more like Madrid'sSan Miguel market 
<http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Mercado_de_San_Miguel_%28Madrid%29_04.jpg>
.

A short walk away on Rua Nova do Carvalho is Sol e Pesca 
<http://www.solepesca.com>, a tiny fishing tackle shop-turned-bar made famous 
by owner Henrique Vaz Pato, whose award-winning cookbook of the same name 
helped elevate one of Lisbon's most famous staples – the tinned sardine – from 
cheap basic to gourmands' favourite.
 Sardine tins at Sol e Pesca. Photograph: Isabel Choat 
Despite its brush with fame, Sol e Pesca remains faithful to its roots. 
Essentially this is a simple bar that does one thing really well: tinned fish 
tapas. It's a sign of just how fashionable the humble sardine has become that 
half the tins of sardines, mussels, squid, octopus, tuna and eels lining the 
shelves of Sol e Pesca now come wrapped in beautiful modern designs. I'd never 
thought of sardine tins as things of beauty but these made me think how great 
they'd look on my kitchen shelf back home. But they aren't just for admiring. 
You select a tin – as well as sardines, there are succulent tuna fillets, 
octopus, squid and eels – and, for €1 more, its contents will be served on corn 
bread, with a tumbler of red wine.

At night, this once seedy neighbourhood buzzes with life as young drinkers 
spill out of bars onto the pavement, many of them outsidePensão Amor <http:>, a 
former brothel that harks back to its old life with walls draped in chiffon, 
tiger fur on the walls, red velvet armchairs and an erotic bookshop. But it was 
still daylight, so we headed to the river and the new promenade linking Cais do 
Sodré with Praça do Comércio, the vast square built after the devastating 1755 
earthquake.

En route we passed another humble but brilliant Lisbon speciality – a quiosque
, or kiosk. They've been around for over a century and stand in some of the 
city's many viewpoints and parks, idyllic settings for a snack, coffee or 
cocktail. The newest is the Sea Me kiosk on the promenade, an outpost of a
popular seafood restaurant <http://www.peixariamoderna.com/> in town. Order 
sopa de peixe (fish soup, €2.75) or the signature salmon burger (€6.50), and a 
€2.50 glass of vinho verde, and tuck in as you gaze across the Tagus.
 Lisbon's Mercado da Ribeira. Photograph: Alamy 
Eventually, the promenade brought us to the square, its elegant colonnades 
home to smart restaurants: the best of them, in Célia's opinion, isPopuli 
<http://populi.pt/en/> which, according to its website offers "wine that 
encloses the heart, beer that undresses the soul, champagne that chills the 
throat, and gin that rips through life". But in Lisbon you are never far from a 
simple, cheap meal, and just round the corner isA Nova Pombalina 
<https://www.facebook.com/anovapombalina> (2-4 Rua do Comércio), a favourite 
among office workers for its suckling pig. We took a seat just before the 
lunchtime rush and ordered croquette-like rissoles, and rolls stuffed with the 
salty, shredded meat cut directly from a whole pig.

All of which served as a rather heavy starter to a delicious lunch, this time 
atTagide <http://www.restaurantetagide.com/>, a tapas bar that shares a 
beautiful 18th-century building with a renowned restaurant of the same name. 
Dark-wood floors, walls of wine bottles, and fantastic views provide a stylish 
setting for such classic dishes ascaldo verde (kale soup) and amêijoas à Bulhão 
Pato (clams in white wine and garlic). For a starter, we ordered Portuguese 
Ibérico ham, little-known outside of the country. "The Spanish get all the 
credit for the ham but it's just as good in Portugal," Célia said.

After a morning of grazing I didn't think I could manage a single morsel more 
but Célia had other ideas, insisting I try Tagide'spastel de nata (custard 
tart) with cinnamon ice cream.Pasteis de Belem 
<http://www.pasteisdebelem.pt/en.html> is widely thought to be the place to eat 
this famous sweet, but Tagide's version was pretty much perfect – and it just 
about finished me off.
 The Wine Spot, Lisbon 
A freelance journalist, Célia is passionate about her city and its cuisine. 
When we weren't eating food, we were talking about it, and I came away with a 
long list of seafood restaurants, cafes, rooftop bars and ice-cream parlours to 
try.

To my relief, our final stop did not involve food. The Wine Spot 
<http://www.winespotchiado.pt/> is a sleek new wine bar in an attractive 
courtyard off Calçada Nova de São Francisco. You could spend up to €300 for a 
bottle, or order a €2.70 glass. Either way, owner Paulo Neto will tell you all 
about it and will open any of the 400 or so premium wines for you to try to 
sample.

Even if I'd eaten nothing but salt cod and custard tarts, I would have loved 
Lisbon. The views of terracotta roofs, churches and spectacular suspension 
bridge – the city's own Golden Gate – at every corner, the cute yellow trams 
that trundle around the crumbling but characterful neighbourhoods – it all 
makes for a brilliant break. The fact that there is so much more to its cuisine 
than its two most famous foods made me love it all the more.

• Eatportugal.net <http://www.eatportugal.net> offers a variety of tours, 
ranging from €40 for a three-and-a-half hour tour of Belem to €80 for the 
gourmet tour
