
It's a motley crew that set off one morning for the end of the world. Chums 
Toddy and Nigel, chic architects Eleo and Filipe, leader Terry, Happy the 
Yorkshire cross, and me. At 68, Terry is fitter and stronger than the rest of 
us put together: since moving to the Algarve nearly a decade ago, he has, with 
walking-minded friends, identified and revived an ancient pilgrim trail that 
wiggles from Alcoutim on the Spanish border to Cabo de São Vicente, Europe's 
most south-westerly point. In Neolithic, Roman, Arab and medieval perceptions, 
this cape was where our earth ended, the sun sinking, hissing, each day into a 
boiling, snake-filled ocean.

Terry has tailored for us a four-day walk of about 100km that starts in the 
foothills below Caldas de Monchique, a spa village high in the drizzly hills 
above the Algarve. Known as Al Gharib ("the west") to the Arabs who ruled here 
for 500 years, today's Algarve is more golf than Gulf. The plane to Faro was 
awash with boozy hen parties and blokey banter, but here, all is peaceful.

Day one: Caldas de Monchique and mountains
 A strolling minstrel above Monchique Photograph: Kevin Gould 
"Hear that?" Terry asks, his accent pure Norfolk. "That's the sound of the 
real Algarve." We hear larksong, and a soft breeze rustling through oleander. 
Within minutes, we also hear the thump of blood in our temples, with Terry 
stepping briskly on while we stump wheezily behind.

As resorts such as Vilamoura and Albufeira on the narrow coastal strip 
somewhere below bask in sun, we're grateful for the cool-ish mist that 
accompanies our first day's trek up the Picota massif, the first of the 
region's two lumpy hill ranges. We're barely 10km from the resorty seaside yet 
we've found another Algarve – an unvarnished, untarnished place of unassuming 
beauty, where time (and the trail we're on) feels endless.

Climbing steadily on footpaths, goat tracks and traffic-free roads, we come to 
a Tibetan monastery with prayer flags a-flutter, knobbly drystone terraces 
planted with spindly olive trees, and hardly a human soul. Hundreds of wild 
arbutus (also known as strawberry bushes) are studded with fruit; when we reach 
the trig point at the top of Picota at 757 metres, my face is the colour of 
strawberries, too.

Our happy band head downhill towards lunch through a glade of 600-year-old 
cork oaks that are in various stages of undress. Among their bare naked trunks 
the atmosphere is magical and the air is alive with yellow-and-orange Cleopatra 
butterflies. Pink belladonna lilies fringe a green pond.

The combination of sweat-soaked clothes, pints of cold Sagres, mountains of 
egg and chips and aching feet makes moving off from pretty Monchique a trial, 
but soon we are climbing, panting, up though shrubby garrigue to immense 
rockeries of slippery syenite stone. At the second peak, Fóia – the highest in 
the Algarve at 902 metres – there are dew-twinkled cobwebs in thickets of 
Scottish-like gorse and heather. There are also coachloads of excursioning 
Scots engaged in dedicated, intensive wine tasting at the lonely souvenir shop.

Terry plans his routes according to his groups, with luggage transfers between 
pre-booked hotels. These range from the bare and simple to tonight's chintzy, 
softly lit palace, thespa hotel in Caldas de Monchique 
<http://www.monchiquetermas.com/hotel-overview.html>. Our spa treatment there 
involves lying face down under body-length showers of hot spa water while 
aching limbs are lovingly pummelled by masseuses in swimsuits. I have rarely 
spent a more tonic 15 minutes, or €15.

Day two: Caldas de Monchique to Aljezur

 Picking walnuts in Marmelete. Photograph: Kevin Gould 
Striding out on day two we head west, rising and falling through forests of 
refreshing-smelling eucalyptus. The trees lead us to Marmelete, a peaceful 
village of walnut trees and whitewashed houses with indigo architraves. This 
type of walking – 25km a day across sometimes challenging terrain – calls for 
levels of fitness and stamina somewhat lacking in our group, but buoyed by 
lunch at Luz snack bar, cheery waves and many aboa tarde! we press on to the 
Pasila and Cerca rivers, whose valleys we follow, and waters we ford. An 
occasional community of self-sufficient spliffed-up hippies reminds us how far 
we are from The Man and his golf clubs.

Soon, marooned below in arable fields under its squat fort is Aljezur (from 
the Arabic word for islands) a white town celebrated for its sweet potatoes.
Hotel Vale de Telha <http://www.valetelha.pt/> is more humble than last night's 
billet, but the chef at its new restaurant has a wonderful touch with 
chargrilled octopus and the waiter has a heavy hand with the soft red wine. I 
dream of white horses.

Day three: Aljezur to Carrapateira

 A petisqueira (Portuguese tapas bar) in Carrapateira. Photograph: Kevin Gould 
The achey way from Aljezur is fringed with fine sand and deep forests of 
umbrella pines. The air turns briny before we spot the sea, way below. A 
distant fisherman casts for sea bass. We clamber down a track and peel off our 
steaming boots and socks to cavort in the water. Happy is in ecstasy.

Twelve kilometres of bootless beach later we're at Bordeira, where tousled 
wetsuited surfers bob around like seals and we strip whitely off to be tumbled 
and bounced along the seabed by Atlantic rollers. The sleepy village of 
Carrapateira, an hour further on, depends on surfers, and adventurous tourists. 
ItsPensão das Dunas <http://www.pensao-das-dunas.pt/en/index_en.html> will fill 
with the aroma of our socks this evening, but before then are frozen beers and 
juicy salads to be enjoyed at the dub-and-dreadlocks vegetarian Microbar in 
Carrapateira's main square.

Day four Carrapateira to Cabo de São Vicente

 Praia de Castelejo. Photograph: Kevin Gould 
Having made a serious dent in Das Dunas's stocks of Alentejan wine (at a tasty 
€5 a bottle) the night before, we find our final day dawns rather too brightly. 
Almost immediately we're into a series of seven sweaty, panting climbs which 
lift us along faint, scrabbled (and sometimes scary) paths overland to our 
reward – a 7km stretch of empty beach, where ours are the only human 
footprints. A hundred metres above some of these, ropes descend from vast, 
sea-sculpted rocky promontories allowing precarious access for the few mad 
fishermen perching on crumbling ledges.

At the southern end of this stretch is tiny Praia de Castelejo, where Senhor 
Policarpo is proud to show off the octopus he has snared. Young families and 
old dears splash in the shallows. Shoals of surf schoolers teeter and splash in 
the rumbling, tumbling waves. There's a cafe only too happy to supply us with 
mountains of garlicky clams and chips to support us on the final push to the 
Cape.

We march on for three or so hours across a rocky plateau towards the 
lighthouse, which appears to get further away the longer we walk. The final 
kilometre is on a metalled road until, footsore and with creaking knees, we 
reach the end of the earth, spent but strong, calm and softly renewed. The 
Algarve Way has walked us through deliciously old places with their fine old 
ways. As the magnesium-fringed clouds glow on the horizon, the sea's surface 
turns to burnished chain mail. Happy gifts a nuzzle to each one of us. The 
crowd gathered to witness the sunset clap and whoop and we are immensely 
cheered. 

How to do it
Algarve Walking Experience <http://algarvewalkingexperience.com/> offers 
tailored guided walks for people of all abilities, including a route along the 
entire Algarve Way, from £100 a day for two, including B&B accommodation and 
luggage transfers

Getting there 
Flights were provided by easyJet <http://www.easyjet.com>, which flies to Faro 
from seven UK airports from £53 return

More information 
Accommodation near Faro was provided by Convento Olhão 
<http://conventoolhao.com/>, which has doubles from €94 B&B but check for 
special offers
