
The dilemma I have a four-year-old son who I love dearly but I don’t deserve. 
I’m not abusive or neglectful, but I feel like what I do for him is not good 
enough. I have a loving husband, but he works such long hours. I recently 
graduated from college while maintaining the household, taking care of my son 
and working full-time at night. I get three hours’ sleep in the early morning 
and another two before I go back out to work. I don’t know how long I can go 
on. I feel as if we live in a society where everyone is in competition with one 
another instead of trying to help each other. I constantly see on Facebook how 
so-and-so’s child can do this or that and I just think of all the things my son 
can’t do and feel he will be disadvantaged. Every time I begin the search for a 
preschool programme I get sick to my stomach that they will kick him out for 
being behind or for his attitude or because he won’t wipe his butt etc.

Mariella replies Let me reorder your list of worries. First and foremost you 
need a good night’s sleep. On what you’re averaging I’d be surprised if you 
could make out individual letters on this page, let alone what I have to say 
more generally. It might also be a good idea to log on toMumsnet 
<http://www.mumsnet.com/> instead of Facebook for a more realistic and honest 
account of the challenges of parenting.

You’re a young, exhausted mother, trying to educate a four-year-old on five 
inconsecutive hours’ sleep a day! No wonder you are struggling to cope – it 
makes me exhausted just reading your schedule.

There’s a reason sleep deprivation is used as a form of torture. It addles our 
minds, and our bodies really can’t stand it. You’re absolutely right that you 
need to lower your expectations, not just of yourself – though that’s an 
important place to start – but also of your son. He’s a tadpole and just coming 
to terms with the world around him. The boy you describe doesn’t sound 
difficult, just human. I know boys of 10 who still have to be reminded to wipe 
their bottoms, so getting your son to do so on a fairly regular basis is a 
minor miracle.

No parent can survive on your punishing schedule and no child thrives if their 
carer is struggling

You mention in your longer letter how he no longer wants to recite his 
alphabet or write his name, and that just makes him one of the vast majority of 
kids who tend to dig their heels in the moment they recognise that you want 
them to do something. I suspect the less like work you make learning the more 
he’ll respond with enthusiasm. I’m no child psychologist, but I am a mother of 
two children myself, and reading your letter makes me despair at my own far 
lazier approach to their learning. I thought reading them a bedside story and, 
now, pointing out every time they say “like” out of context was enough from me. 
You’ve set the bar high for yourself and it sounds as though it’s been dictated 
by the unattainable standards you’ve observed being set on social media.

Basing your reality on other people’s fantasy lives is never going to make you 
feel good. Whether it’s holiday snaps on Facebook or perfect meals captured on 
Instagram, the most important thing to remember is that just because it’s 
dressed up as real doesn’t make it so. Regular readers will agree that my 
scepticism knows no bounds when it comes to the “reality” being dished up 
online.

I disagree with only one observation you make, and that’s that our society is 
based on competition rather than altruism. There are plenty of kind, decent 
people around; to find them you just need to shut your eyes and ears to the 
deafening chorus of fakes.

Locate a weekly playgroup in your area. Not only will your son be learning 
skills while having fun, but you might also make some supportive friends you 
can call on. And stop prevaricating about preschool – I’m sure you’d both 
benefit from the degree of independence that would give you. Most importantly, 
calling a helpline, such asFamilyLine <http://www.familyline.org.uk/> (0808 800 
5678), would be a positive step. They will give you practical advice on what to 
do to reduce the pressure you are under.

While it’s admirable that you want him to learn new skills, it’s not necessary 
to add to your “to do” list at present. Rather than taking on the burden of 
teaching him beyond the basics, just aim to have some fun together. You’d be 
surprised how much kids learn simply by observing the world around them. The 
rest will come at school, and with a supportive parent like you, I have no 
doubt he will flourish academically when the time is right.

Finally, and this may be the hardest thing for you to tackle, consider 
changing your job, or at least your working hours. No full-time parent could 
survive long-term on the punishing schedule you are enduring, and no child will 
thrive if their main carer is struggling to cope. The burden you are under is 
untenable and you need to change the status quo. It sounds to me as if your son 
is blessed with hardworking parents who want the best for him while he’s 
stamping his foot for some playtime with you. Try just hanging out, reading a 
story or taking a walk instead of cramming him in preparation for preschool.

The days of diligent study and testing exams will come all too soon. For now 
the best mental and physical nourishment he could have is the company of his 
more relaxed mum.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
