
I love my PhD, even though the subject makes me furious. It’s an oral history 
of domestic abuse in Scotland, 1979 to 1992. I have interviewed Scottish women 
who were abused in their marriages, as well as professionals who might have 
helped at the time. My PhD will include very private and previously untold 
stories of Scottish marriages, of living with everyday domestic violence, of 
its impact, and of the admitted failures of police, prosecutors and social 
workers back then.

I have been a professional specialising in domestic abuse, working for a 
Scottish council. I heard women describe living with domestic abuse every day. 
With a first degree in history, I was curious about the roots of such abuse – 
and felt that I had spotted a hole in late 20th century Scottish history.

As it turned out, not much history had been written about abuse in modern 
marriage, based on first-hand accounts. I had just become a visiting lecturer 
on domestic abuse in the school of social work and social policy at Strathclyde 
University and they accepted my proposal for a PhD. An initially sceptical 
research ethics committee – afraid of third-party libel and disclosures of 
sexual abuse - had kittens at my early proposals to develop a methodology for 
interviewing people about such a sensitive subject. Getting ethical approval 
took a year.

Related: Studying 18th-century criminals makes me look at my modern prejudice 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/14/studying-18th-century-criminals-has-made-me-look-at-my-modern-prejudice>

Solving puzzles 

I love my interviews because they are solving research puzzles. In the 1980s, 
following the explosive women’s liberation movement of the 1970s, the UK 
settled into the Thatcher era. The sexual revolution stalled in Scotland. For 
many, the heady promise of women’s lib passed them by.

Trapped in violent and controlling marriages in the conservative, sexist 
Scotland of the 1980s, women faced a largely hostile society which offered 
little hope of escape or justice. I want to understand why – because people 
just don’t know about this important part of Scotland’s past. I want to put 
women’s private lives into the history books alongside the miners’ strike and 
the poll tax.

By agreeing to talk in such intimate detail about their marriages, women knew 
they would be going public and that their recordings would be archived in the 
Scottish Oral History Centre. That takes courage. But they wanted to show that 
things have changed: that help is available, society is more understanding and 
freedom is possible.

I love my PhD because I was privileged to meet quietly courageous women and 
bear witness to harrowing accounts of casual physical, emotional and sexual 
violence. My PhD makes me humble.

This is what one woman told me about her husband: “He drank a lot – and I went 
in beside one o’ the weans and he came and pu’ed me through and raped me and 
flung 10 pence at me.”

Related: My PhD takes me into a world of space molecules and alien fart jokes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/04/my-phd-takes-me-into-a-world-of-space-molecules-and-alien-fart-jokes>

Another woman described what happened when she tried to turn off the 
television: “I got punched in the kidneys, [because] he wanted to watch 
football on TV… I had an exam the next day and I wanted to study.”

Professional lapses

 Meanwhile, the professionals I interviewed painted a grim picture of a 
society which cared little and did even less for abused women. In patriarchal 
1980s Scotland, when there was no training or legal heft to pursue 
perpetrators, they made it up as they went along, doing the best they could – 
often with disastrous results.

One policeman described being stuck in a lift with a colleague and a drunk man 
and woman, in 1985.

”They’d had a wee argument … he punched her right in the face in front e’ us. 
At that point, we kind of separated them. She wouldnae want to make a complaint 
and we just left them in the house. And I thought to myself, that canny be 
right.”

Offenders often got off scot-free. Most women knew that approaching the 
authorities was a waste of time and struggled on alone.



”You’ve made your bed, now lie in it” was a popular old Scottish dictum about 
the reality of a women’s marriage to the husband she chose - and its one I’ve 
heard countless times while researching my PhD.

Doesn’t that make you mad?


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
