
1 What is resilience?

Rachel Wardell, chair of the workforce development policy committee, 
Association of Directors of Children’s Services: “We have to be careful about 
how we define resilience. At its most basic it is a mental and physical 
flexibility (perhaps even toughness) that enables a person to recover from 
setbacks, challenges and difficulties. In the context of the emotionally 
demanding work of social work and social care, it is easy to see how that 
quality would be useful.

What we have to be careful about is that we don’t automatically expect a 
“capacity to recover” that disadvantages people in our workforce whose physical 
and mental health is not 100%, or that we expect a toughness that results in 
people becoming uncaring in their work, or that we confuse resilience with 
expecting people to tolerate working conditions that other professions would 
find intolerable.”

Related: How can social workers build resilience and avoid burnout? Live Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/05/how-can-social-workers-build-resilience-and-avoid-burnout-live-qa>

Jim Greer, principal lecturer in social work, Teesside University: “Finding a 
definition of resilience in the context of social work requires us first to 
consider that social work involves emotional labour and that social workers can 
experience vicarious trauma as a result of hearing and responding to other 
people’s traumatic experiences. In essence, it is an ability to recover from 
these experiences and to be able to continue to cope with our work and personal 
lives.”

2 Is there a balance to be found between encouraging social workers to be 
resilient and creating working conditions that aren’t inherently stressful?

Emma Perry, senior lecturer in social work, University of Gloucestershire: 
“Resilience shouldn’t be used to expect staff to manage intolerable conditions 
or workloads. It does need to be acknowledged that everyone has their limits. 
It should also be recognised that organisations have a key part to play in 
resilience through providing appropriate and good quality support and working 
environments for their staff.”

Jim Greer: “Resilience is needed to cope with the emotional demands of social 
work as it occurs within a reasonable caseload and where there is good 
supervision. It is important that employers realise this. Helping social 
workers to improve their resilience should never be seen as an excuse for 
expecting people to cope with unreasonable workloads. Nor should the concept be 
used to attach blame to those who are not coping. Even people who normally have 
good resilience will have a tipping point in terms of stress, or a period in 
their life where their ability to cope is reduced by pressures on them from 
elsewhere.”

3 How can employers best support their staff?

Ruth Allen, chief executive, British Association of Social Workers: “IStaff 
stress is often compounded or caused by a sense of disempowerment in the 
workplace. This is antithetical to a sustainable, respected professional role 
and is counterproductive for quality of service and positive user experience. 
Practitioners and their professional views need to be integrated into 
management and leadership approaches. Communication and transparency are key to 
this.”

Anna Elliott, acting service manager, learning and development – children and 
families, Somerset county council: “How organisations look after their staff is 
critical and of course good quality reflective supervision is vital in this. 
Ensuring everyone in social work teams has good training on reflective 
supervision is important. We can’t assume everyone knows what good quality 
reflective supervision looks like. Often if you haven’t experienced it yourself 
it is difficult to provide it for others so it’s an organisational 
responsibility to train all supervisors.”

Elizabeth Frost, associate professor, University of West of England: “When we 
interviewed social workers who had stayed in child protection for more than 
three years, the things that kept them there and feeling positive were about 
identity fit (still feeling committed to the work – the politics of helping), 
friendships at work and the support they gave, a sense of autonomy around 
decisions and further training, as well as organisational issues such as good 
supervision.”

4 How can social workers build their own resilience?

Ruth Allen: “I started practising mindfulness over 10 years ago during a 
stressful period in my work. I don’t practise every day but it is an inner 
resource that is always available to me – and it has been crucial at key 
moments in my working life. No one can take it away from you once you have 
found a way to return to a settled centre. Just a few minutes can settle a 
chaotic situation and enable you to re-engage with clarity. It is not a panacea 
for poorly framed roles and lack of control over managing work, but it is a 
fantastic tool that you can take with you anywhere.”

Paul Dockerty, health and wellbeing officer, Cafcass: “By encouraging simple 
daily practices such as mindful breathing or taking a short break away from the 
desk at lunch time, we can create a sense of balance, ease and energy. The key 
is to encourage more mindfulness into our work days.”

Related: Social workers on hotdesking: 'It contributes to high stress and 
sickness levels' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/06/social-work-hotdesking-stress-munro>

5 Is there room for different ways of working, such as sabbaticals or 
flexi-time?

Rachel Wardell: “We need to be open to bold ideas about working practice, but 
before implementing sabbaticals after specific individual cases, or something 
like four weeks on, two weeks off, I would want to think carefully about the 
impact of these practices on the vulnerable people we work with, who tend to 
tell us that they value continuity, consistency and predictability. One way to 
manage this may be with team-held caseloads. It will be interesting to hear 
more from employers who work that way about any benefits for resilience and for 
relationships with service users.”

Emma Perry: “Innovative ways of working would need to be introduced with care 
to ensure they actually help in this area rather than hinder. We have seen how 
flexible working can be a double-edged sword as it may be beneficial in some 
areas but can reduce team cohesiveness and access to support from colleagues, 
while working from home can blur boundaries and impact on the work-life balance 
– areas that we know are important in building resilience.”

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.

