
“I feel that I couldn’t be in a better place,” says Brenda Boley, a resident 
of theNew Deanery <http://www.thenewdeanery.co.uk/> care home near Braintree, 
Essex. “I mean nobody wants to be in a home, you’d rather be in your own home, 
but when that isn’t possible … at the moment I couldn’t even think of going 
anywhere else.”

This is testimony that any care home could be proud of. But it is even more 
striking given that two years ago, the care home in question was the subject of 
an undercover Panorama investigation into poor care. In the programme, 
broadcast in April 2014, care workers at the home (then called the Old Deanery) 
were seen slapping and harassing residents. Three workers were subsequently 
jailed for the abuse and the home was put into special measures by Essex county 
council.


Just two years on and the home has received an award from sector skills body 
Skills for Care for itsapproach to leadership and management 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/Getting-involved/Accolades-awards/201516-Winners/Sonnet-Care-Homes.aspx>
. An inspection by the Care Quality Commission last yearrated the home as 
requiring improvement <http://www.cqc.org.uk/location/1-121360985>, but found 
the service to be caring.

It concluded: “The service had implemented a number of systems to improve, 
monitor and maintain quality of all of its provision. Some work was still 
needed in this.”

The home is awaiting the outcome of a more recent inspection, and is hopeful 
it can match the performance of St Mary’s Court in Essex – also owned by Sonnet 
– which israted good overall <http://www.cqc.org.uk/location/1-121361003>, with 
outstanding leadership.

There was something about the culture that meant people who were not acting in 
a caring way were allowed to continue
Julia Clinton, CEO, Sonnet 
So how was the home turned around?


The New Deanery was bought by Sonnet Care Homes in late 2013. At this point, 
an undercover reporter from Panorama had already been at the home for several 
months. Early in 2014, “We had a letter from Panorama, 14 pages long with lots 
and lots of allegations in it,” says Julia Clinton, chief executive of Sonnet. 
Nine staff were suspended, and then dismissed when the programme aired and the 
allegations were proved. And then Sonnet went into improvement mode.


“What became quickly apparent to us was that whilst the incidents that were on 
the Panorama programme were the most serious examples of where things weren’t 
going as they should … there was a culture within the home that allowed that to 
happen,” says Clinton.

Related: Two years ago we called for reform in care homes. We're still waiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/31/care-home-reform-ageing-population>

The owners took a few weeks getting to know staff and residents before 
creating an improvement plan. Clinton stresses that there were “lots of really 
good staff working here, really caring”, before the abuse came to light. “But 
there was something about the culture that meant people who were not acting in 
a caring way were allowed to continue to behave in that way.”


Clinton and chief finance officer Jo Moore sat down to work out a plan. One 
key thing they wanted to change was an overcomplicated management structure, 
which led to lots of layers between frontline staff and bosses, and meant care 
workers were reluctant to approach managers. “We made it our personal mission 
to get to know people,” says Clinton.

Jane Sadowski, the registered manager, lives on site, which has aided 
management visibility. The leadership team tries to lead by example: “If you 
came at the right time you’d see Julia cleaning the toilets or Jo sitting with 
a resident with dementia going through a story book,” says Sadowski.


The biggest change has been through the home’s model of what good care is: the 
acronym KCR, meaning kindness, comfort and respect, was introduced in July 
2014. “We said if we’re going to get everybody working in the same way and 
we’re going to really drive through … how we do things around here, unite 
everybody, we need to call it something,” says Clinton. “And it’s not just 
about how we treat the residents, it’s about how we treat each other as well.”


On a walk around the spacious, light home, reminders for KCR can be found 
everywhere, on noticeboards and in the books of “KCR stars” dotted around on 
tables. These are awards, given once a month, to a staff member or resident who 
has exemplified the values of KCR.

Sadowski says that, after Panorama “there was a fear of everyone being under a 
cloud of suspicion”. So while there is a strong emphasis put on whistleblowing, 
and staff are encouraged to report anything untoward, the stars are intended to 
praise exceptional care and reinforce what that looks like. “It’s the person 
that stays an hour after their shift reading a book with a resident just 
because it’s a kind thing to do,” says Clinton.


It’s a lovely place to work. I wouldn’t want to work anywhere else
Allison Horley, The New Deanery 
The stars were suggested by the KCR volunteers group at the home, a forum of 
staff members who communicate with management and highlight things that could 
be improved. “For the staff to be part of the decision-making and for them to 
feel they’re valued is just so vital,” says Sadowski. There is also a weekly 
residents’ forum, where people can bring up any issues, and management run any 
changes by residents. This communication is vital – as Sadowski says: “It’s 
their home.”


Related: Dementia care home scoops top national award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/11/dementia-care-home-scoops-top-national-award>

The biggest impact of these changes has been on the people who live in the 
home. Gillian Lee is the daughter of Joan Maddison, whose abuse by care workers 
was featured in the Panorama programme. Lee says it has been a journey “between 
how it was then to how it is now” and talks about how hard the leadership team 
have had to work. “They’re not perfect, we haven’t got the most 100%, totally 
without any issues situation here,” she says. “But what we have got is a 
turnaround on the ethics and the mindset and the desire to make it right, the 
desire to focus on individuals and make sure those individuals are supported as 
a person, whatever their needs may be.”


Care worker Allison Horley has worked at the New Deanery since before the 
Panorama programme was aired, and says everything is very different now. The 
home had more residents with high-dependent needs at the time of the programme 
and, in late 2014, the leadership made the decision to not admit any more 
residents in order to make improvements.

The home now has 40 residents, with a capacity of 80, and one care worker for 
every four residents, which allows staff to spend quality time with them. “We 
all spend loads of time with the residents, just walking round the garden, just 
sitting having a chat or tea and coffee,” says Horley. And when asked whether 
she likes working at the home, she is on the edge of tears: “It’s a lovely 
place to work. I wouldn’t want to work anywhere else.”


 * Nominations for the Accolades awards 
<http://www.skillsforcare.org.uk/Getting-involved/Accolades-awards/Accolades-awards.aspx>
 are now open.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
