
Once there were more than 30 maltings in Warminster, supplied with barley 
grown on the chalky hills that surround it. Now there's only one - and 
Warminster Maltings shouldn't really be with us at all. Its existence has been 
threatened so many times since it was built in 1845 that divine providence in 
the form of one or two inspired people must be why it's still going - and, 
therefore, it must have some divine purpose. That purpose is to provide the 
finest traditional floor malt to brewers not just up and down our own land, but 
throughout Europe and as far afield as New Zealand. When it comes to malted 
barley, there is nothing finer than traditional floor malt.

Chris Garrett, head maltster at Warminster, tells me that malted barley is 
"the foundation on which beer is built". Hops tend to win the brewing Oscars 
because they're the showy ingredient that everyone goes on about, but without 
malted barley, they'd struggle to make their way. Without barley, in other 
words, there would be no beer. Malted barley provides the sugars that turn into 
alcohol that... well, you get my drift.

Until quite recently, a malt was a malt was a malt as far as the brewing 
industry was concerned, but then Brewing Research International proved that all 
malts weren't born equal and that top of the malts was Maris Otter, the last 
barley developed (in 1966) specifically for brewing. Robin Appel, grain 
merchant and owner of Warminster Maltings, has taken it upon himself to keep 
the variety going and can now get whatever barley a brewer wants grown pretty 
much where the brewer wants it: Cornish barley for Cornish brewers, Hampshire 
barley for Hampshire brewers. And at a time when the move to local sourcing is 
gathering pace, this has obvious appeal.

To step into the malting rooms that line part of a quiet back street in this 
quiet county town is to step into another era. "There are only four of these 
kinds of maltings in Britain," Appel says, "and these are the only ones built 
to Customs & Excise specifications, so they can inspect the process at various 
points."

The barley is steeped for three days in tanks of water from the maltings' own 
well, before being drained and spread out over four floors to germinate. This 
is the key part of the process, because in the course of germination the 
insoluble starches in the grain are converted into soluble starches (and 
soluble starches turn to the sugars that, in turn, turn into alcohol, etc). 
Germination takes around five days - you can't be more precise because this is 
a natural process that is susceptible to changes in temperature: too cold and 
the grains won't germinate; too hot and they'll sprout too fast. As the grains 
lie several inches deep on the floor, they have to be turned by hand to keep 
them germinating evenly. It's a matter of judgment that relies solely on the 
skill of the maltsters. Finally, the grains are dried in a kiln, then packed 
and sent off to wherever they're needed.

And that need is growing. After years of marginal existence, "we're quite 
optimistic now," Appel says. "We've got all these regional brewers, not to 
mention micro-breweries, asking for our malts."

"When I started, I had to go out to sell my malts," Garrett adds. "Now the 
breweries are beating a path to our door." Quite a lot of breweries, too, as it 
happens - there are more than 700 in the country, of which 400 have been 
started in the past five years, according to Garrett. And he should know 
because he supplies more than half of them. Just in case we get carried away, 
though, he says we've also lost a few over the same period, and that overall 
the beer market is in decline.

Still, one tonne of barley makes 10,000 pints of beer - and since the 
Warminster Maltings can sell all the barley it can malt, there'll be plenty of 
very fine beers made with the finest malts in the world for some years to come. 
And I'll drink to that.
