
To conclude our discussion of poetry, let's look at what we poets call "free 
verse" in which stifling conventions are abandoned. So is metre. You can even 
spell wrong and use incorrect tenses. That is why it is so liberating. Anyone 
can do it. It imposes certain responsibilities on the audience, of course: 
nodding all the time as if you get what's going on and avoiding the use of 
provincial expressions such as, "Wow, crikey, that was deep!"

To write a poem in free verse, first think of what you want to say. Let's say 
you fell in love with a man who didn't appreciate you and called you by another 
woman's name. A classic sonnet on this theme might begin:

Jonathan, I fear you never loved me

As, during love, you always called

 me Gwen

When, in fact, I am not Gwen but Hol-ly

How would you like it if I called

 you Sven?

But we might adopt a freer approach:

Alabaster god turning bowls of gold

 into hedonist shuffling

 waltz-framed sadness!

You have misnomered the gnashing

 flashing tide of time

(effortlessly smashing!)

GwenGwenGwen my butt. Try Holly,

dirt-bag, get a life! Honestly, I could

 Thrash you, Jon.

Mesmerising pulse of sliding violet.

And guess what? I am keeping

 your microwave.

We can also invent ways of imposing structure on our free verse. I recently 
wrote a poem in which the first word of each line began with the letter W:

Wow, I think that I shall never see,

Whoa, a poem lovely as a tree.

Well, poems are made by fools like me,

Whoops, but only God can make a tree.

Some say poetry's been supplanted by pop music lyrics. I disagree. There will 
always be poets among us - people who want to be rock stars, say, but don't 
know how to play an instrument. We each have the potential to be a poet, as 
ultimately poetry is just any old thing, properly punctuated. Watch: I'm now 
going to step out into my street, transcribe the first thing I hear, then 
punctuate it into a beautiful free verse poem for you:

What the hell are you

 looking at, Saunders? Why do you think it's OK to

 come out here in just your pyjama bottoms do you think you look

good well you don't you are pale as hell and chubby and I don't think my

damn kids

need to see that

mess. Jesus!

Why are you writing down what

 I'm saying, stop that stop that

 you freak if you

 sell what you are writing down you better give me

a cut. For sure. No like. OK. See you

 later.
