
The cleverest new business strategy to emerge because of the internet must be 
Amazon’s cloud model.

Google’s AdSense <https://www.google.com/adsense/start/#?modal_active=none> 
probably ranks up there. It’s brilliant, too. Everyone engaged in a 
relationship with Google benefited in one way or another as their ecosystem 
expanded, advertisers and publishers alike.

But Amazon’s Web Services <http://aws.amazon.com/> seem to go from strength to 
strength in a way that media networks must surely envy. They built an 
incredible technology environment that makesAmazon.com <http://Amazon.com> 
possible, which is no small feat. Then they exposed their internal 
infrastructure for pay-as-you-go style fees on a self-serve basis to startups 
and eventually large enterprise customers.

Companies have sold or leased their assets including real estate and financial 
assets to other companies for years, but Amazon found a way to capitalise on a 
unique asset. By selling spare capacity, their customers have subsidised 
Amazon’s investment in technology infrastructure that in turn benefits from 
future development.

It’s nearly a virtuous circle.

I’m reminded of this while learning more about the Washington Post’s 
intentions to sell their content management tools to other publishers. The 
platform is calledArc <https://www.arcpublishing.com/>.

Matthew Monahan is senior product manager responsible for Arc at the 
Washington Post <http://www.theguardian.com/media/washington-post>. He said, 
“At first we were just building solutions to problems we had with existing 
systems. Then these things started to come together and we developed this 
vision that this could be a true platform. We gave it away for free to 
university newspapers like the Columbia Spectator to test our idea and begin 
getting feedback from users.”

Not surprisingly, Amazon founder Jeff Bezos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/jeff-bezos> also owns the Washington 
Post.

Arc or elements of it started at WaPo well before Bezos got there. In fact, 
tech teams within media orgs have tried to spin out their publishing tools 
since CMS became an acronym. But having the backing of the most successful 
person to pursue the model will be a real advantage for them.

Every business can do this kind of thing – providing internal capabilities to 
others. Media is certainly full of capability, and they would be wise to profit 
from it. The trick is working out which things make sense to sell and how to 
position them.

Media’s long history with content syndication is proof it’s possible. Getting 
ongoing fees from other publishers for content you’ve already used and paid for 
is a good idea. That is, if you can get money for it. Good luck with that.

More recently, media organisations have set up internal marketing agencies. 
Custom publishing is a sensible idea because content is something the 
organisation knows how to do. Might as well profit as a content mercenary if 
you can. But selling editorial independence or the appearance thereof kills 
media brands. It can be a huge distraction if handled poorly.

There are more internet-native ways to achieve the kinds of results Amazon and 
Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> earned with their 
respective strategies.

Of course, content management is basically commoditised technology now. There 
are many technology companies focused on it, and media companies may not have 
all the operational resources required to be competitive. Monahan said: “We’re 
going to walk before we run. With every agreement we evaluate our capability to 
deliver on the SLA. We have to be able to support it, so I have to be careful 
not to oversell it.”

But media companies have advantages that pure software companies don’t.

First, any media organisation with a good tech team has been customising 
publishing tools hand in hand with content creators for a long time. They’ve 
worked out real needs directly with the people using the tools.

Monahan said Arc’s Pagebuilder tool was built so that developers at the 
Washington Post could iterate quickly along with editors and their changing 
needs on the newsdesk and create templates and configurable tools to use again.

That process of making useful things for editors on a daily basis is unique to 
media organisations.

Second, media organisations have real content in their publishing systems. 
That content could be shared with other customers and vice versa. Content 
sharing doesn’t come easily to publishers, but it could be used as a piece of 
the puzzle in a way that software companies can’t offer.

Third, media organisations have readers and advertisers. A lot of them. 
Pooling access to them could enable some interesting new partnerships and make 
them more competitive against the many forces challenging the wider media 
industry.

Again, publishers often feel very proprietary about these things and struggle 
to create federated networks of either audience or advertisers, much less both. 
Or if they do succeed in agreeing to connect their resources, they often fail 
to actually support the network and invest in it.

Instead, publishers give inventory to ad networks and other third parties who 
then create those audience and advertising pools, profiting from them and 
sharing only a slice of the value back to the publisher.

Publishers could negotiate more effectively when big changes happen in the 
market if they had means for steering their many resources collectively. They 
need to look outside their office walls and form networks that benefit everyone 
who participates.

And therein lies the problem. Publishers tend to look inward and miss out on 
the internet’s greatest strengths. They fail to create the kind of 
bi-directional relationships with partners that Amazon, Google and other 
Silicon Valley platforms have mastered over the years.

BuzzFeed’s outward-looking mentality offers many lessons for the rest of the 
media market.

At the SXSW event in Austin, Texas, last month BuzzFeed chief marketing 
officer Frank Cooper talked about an advertising product they plan to offer as 
a service.Swarm 
<http://www.adweek.com/news/technology/buzzfeed-launches-new-ad-format-further-monetize-its-big-social-reach-170172>
 will help marketers create better buzz across the many social platforms people 
use today.

Similarly, Vox Media offers a product to advertisers called Chorus 
<http://adage.com/article/special-report-sxsw/media-companies-focused-marketing-platforms/303089/>
 that optimises content created for a campaign and amplifies it on social 
platforms. They plan to push that strategy further by offering their content 
platform as part of the relationship with their customers.

The tools these companies are offering give them a lot of leverage for future 
revenue. They don’t need to sell the software. Instead, it helps them do 
larger-sized advertising deals.

Platform business strategies may not come easily to a company with broadcast 
traditions, but once you get through the many walls that exist between 
organisation there’s a lot of potential in the networks that can arise.

“The friction in setting up deals with publishing partners is what keeps 
people from experimenting with these new models,” said Monahan. “You might be 
able to find a way to offer something really valuable to readers with a partner 
or group of partners, but you’d have to convince developers to join up and set 
up a joint venture. But if everyone is on the same platform it becomes a lot 
easier. You could build products that allow people to negotiate those deals 
electronically.”

Media companies should focus more on creating Minimum Viable Platforms or 
collaborating with others that are doing it already. They ask “How high?” when 
Facebook and Google want them to jump. If they would stop viewing the world as 
a zero-sum game and work together more they might find they can create 
ecosystems that are even more amazing than their tech predecessors.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.

• This article was amended on 12 April 2016. An earlier version incorrectly 
stated that Amazon Web Services was built using the spare capacity from the 
technology behindAmazon.com <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>.
