
After a few weeks of last-minute-marathoning, recovering, and holidaying in 
Japan, it’s time to restart. I’ve been doing little but easy running - and not 
all that much of that. So on Saturday it was time for my first track session in 
a few weeks. I’d forgotten how quickly you get out of the habit - it wasn’t so 
much the reps (1500ms, ugh) as the fact that for the entire afternoon I felt 
like each limb suddenly weighed four stone more. Obviously my brain was 
suffering from some kind of oxygen deficit too as I nevertheless decided this 
was the ideal time to embark on massive spring clean of the house. Fool.

But though it is still just spring, I’ve got an autumn marathon target in mind 
and that’s not (alas) going to run itself, so it’s time for me to get back into 
proper training. And - horror! - going easy on the cake for a bit too. Anyone 
who is in our Strava group (please join if you aren’t) can look forward to me 
whimpering virtually after Tuesday track sessions and Thursday tempo runs - and 
all the rest. Now if that doesn’t tempt you to join ..

Meanwhile, the race season is starting to get to the shorter stuff for 
distance runners - 5km, 10km - and the mile season beckons. The nice thing 
about all those distances is that you can, if finances and time allow, string 
together quite a few of them over a summer. Recovery is quick, so if it doesn’t 
go quite right, you can enter another. I’ll be doing the Vitality 10km 
(formerly known as the Bupa 10km) so do let me know if anyone else is, and 
fancies a meet up.

Finally, anyone in London this coming Saturday should most definitely head to 
Parliament Hill for theNight of the 10km PBs 
<http://highgate.athletics-uk.org/default.asp>. This brilliant, free and fun 
event is now not only a place to drink beer while watching the best of British 
runners, but the official Olympic Team GB trials. Come and cheer in an outside 
lane - did I mention it’s free?

So over to you. How was your weekend running? Racing, race planning or 
training, or just enjoying some Vitamin D? Comments, suggestions, inspiration 
below the line as always, please.
