
Britain’s university sector is unusually united over opposing the country’s 
possible exit from theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, 
and for good reason: the EU is a reliable source of funding, in the form of 
students, research grants and capital finance.


There has been sustained growth in students from EU countries attending 
British universities in recent years, at a time when domestic school-leavers 
have been in a demographic dip. They now make up about 5% of UK student 
numbers, bringing in more than £200m a year in fees alone.


While the EU arrivals haven’t been deterred by the £9,000 yearly tuition fee, 
they do qualify for England’s loan regime, unlike non-EU students. And many 
vice- chancellors fear that imposing the higher fees paid by students from 
outside the EU would inevitably cause a fall-off.


Both students and universities benefit from the EU-funded Erasmus exchange 
scheme, which sees around 10,000 British students study at EU universities 
through the scheme each year, and a similar number coming in the other 
direction.


Related: Brexit vote 'could cost UK universities tens of millions in student 
fees' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/brexit-vote-cost-uk-universities-tens-millions-student-fees-ucl>

The EU also distributes a massive research budget, and university leaders see 
it as a less capricious source of funding than the British government. As the 
Universities UK lobby group points out, the UK wins an outsized share of EU 
research funds because of the international success of universities such as 
Oxford and Imperial College.

Similarly, the EU’s free movement of labour suits the UK in attracting 
top-flight research students and academics from the rest ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> without the complications of 
work visas.

In recent years the British university sector has benefited from borrowing 
through the European Investment Bank, which offers lower-cost access to the 
capital markets. Last month University College London announced a £280m loan 
from the EIB, the largest the bank has ever extended to a university.

Overall the EIB has advanced £4bn to Britain’s education sector in the past 
decade, including to 30 universities and 42 further education colleges.

While some exit-leaning university council members have caused their VCs 
headaches on the subject, the VCs themselves are firmly opposed to exit on 
pragmatic grounds.

