
“The playground, filled with a swarm of shrieking, violent children, was a 
place of terror to me.” (James Kirkup)

“There was heaps and heaps of children and we all played together. Yes, and we 
all played together.”(Alice Tulloch)

What do these two very different people have in common? They were both only 
children.

I love my PhD <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd>, on 
the public perceptions and personal experiences of only children between 1850 
and 1950, because I get such satisfaction from busting stereotypes. The above 
examples are excerpts from the 200 autobiographies and oral history interviews 
I am using to argue that there was – and is – no such thing as a typical only 
child.

Poet James Kirkup was naturally quiet and timid; living in a lively 
working-class South Shields neighbourhood, he had plenty of opportunities to 
socialise with other children, but his temperament often prevented him from 
taking them up.

Related: My PhD takes me into a world of space molecules and alien fart jokes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/04/my-phd-takes-me-into-a-world-of-space-molecules-and-alien-fart-jokes>

Bookkeeper Alice Tulloch’s lower middle-class neightbourhood in Bootle, 
Merseydside was similarly sociable, and she took advantage of this, even 
joining in very rough games.

It is not just only children’s personalities that vary, but their feelings and 
relationships with their parents, extended families, and other children. Their 
experiences tend to be shaped by factors including not only temperament, but 
class, location, historical era, health, and the situations and attitudes of 
their parents.

Another reason I love my PhD is that I’m using sources in new ways. I have 
rescued disused autobiographies from the library store, and enjoyed shining my 
own light on interviews recorded for different purposes.

Some researchers have already used the autobiographies to make simplistic 
points about miserable only children, taking a statement such as “I was lonely 
because I was an only child” at face value, rather than considering other 
factors.

 I look for alternative explanations. For example, poet and novelist Cecil Day 
Lewis’s loss of his mother at the age of 4 could better explain his intense 
relationship with his religious father. Author Elizabeth Goudge’s mother’s poor 
health and austere childhood likely contributed to the overindulgence which 
rendered Goudge a “brat”.

The sources are often messy and sometimes contradictory, as writers and 
interviewees negotiate the stereotypes and attempt to ascribe meaning to 
experiences – but this very human disorder is another thing I love about my 
work.

The phase of my research where I was reading and listening to life stories for 
the first time was probably one of the most enjoyable of my PhD experience. And 
I have found even more to love in my investigation of the only child 
stereotype. I’ve read more than 40 books on child guidance and psychology, and 
come across all sorts of slurs on only children from concerned writers. The 
decrease in birth rate from the 1870s, eugenic concerns with “degeneration”, 
ideas about the effects of environment on how children develop, and the 
relative novelty of only children generated a lot of unease, which has somehow 
stuck with us to this day.

My personal favourites are from Eugene W Bohannon’s turn-of-the-century 
research findings on only children, based on now-questionable surveying 
methods. These were repeated in several early 20th-century child-rearing 
manuals, and provide a great way to introduce my topic at conferences.

Related: Share your ideas: how to write for the Higher Education Network 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>

Bohannon offers a comprehensive list of supposedly common only child traits 
including cruelty; gluttony; spoiltness; precocity; premature development; 
smugness; “priggish self-conceit”; “pronounced peculiarities”; selfishness; bad 
temper; jealousy; untruthfulness; haughtiness; stubbornness; and vanity; not to 
mention effeminacy in boys.

I have also enjoyed coming across curious admonitory vignettes of only 
children gone bad. John S C Abbott describes how an only son, overindulged by 
his mother, came to be “self-willed, turbulent, and revengeful”. He eventually 
torched his mother’s house in a rage and “in his cell, he became a maniac, if 
he was not such before, and madly dug out his own eyes”.

Ultimately, I love doing a PhD in itself. As well as being guaranteed a 
cerebral three-year job, the privilege of full funding means I can work how, 
when and where I want. I have a great excuse to go to the British Library and 
attend mind-expanding conferences, and I’ve had the chance to improve my skills 
in public speaking, teaching, networking and social media.

I don’t yet know if I’m going to pursue a career in academia, but I will never 
see my PhD as a waste of time. Some people go travelling for a few years in 
their 20s; I’ve gone time-travelling.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
