
It only takes one person to change a lot of minds. I went to what can only be 
described as a slum school in Salford – rough and full of trainee punks – but I 
was very lucky in that I had one inspiring teacher, John Malone, who gave the 
whole class an interest in romantic poetry. Somehow he created a hothouse, 
competitive atmosphere.Poetry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/poetry>, 
because of him, became a macho thing at our school, and we discovered very 
quickly that it was a great way to impress chicks.

I’m not fond of crowds. I’m no jittery neurotic, but I don’t really want to be 
surrounded by a lot of people if I have a choice. A big audience though… now 
that I love.

By the 80s, anything to do with punk was perceived as rancid. Me being known 
as the “punk poet” meant my work and I plummeted. I spent a decade living a 
feral existence on very little, and heroin became a big part of that. Slowly, 
with help, I managed to get myself out.

Impotent rage is my default setting. Specifically when it comes to politics. I 
can’t believe the ideas people walk around with. I try not to get too upset but 
it’s got to the point where I’d like to stop reading the news, as I’m 
infuriated on a daily basis.

I worry about other people’s kids. I watched a guy in the street yesterday 
pushing his daughter in a pram while he had his phone wedged between his ear 
and shoulder. The thought of him crossing the road without looking horrified me.

A dry martini and the odd flutter on the nags are my lasting vices. I don’t 
drink until after 6pm – I’m no lush – but a few glasses of wine with dinner and 
chat is a nice way to spend an evening, isn’t it?

If I wasn’t a poet, I’d probably be some tin-pot dictator of a banana republic

The last time I cried was today, when I heard an old friend had died. I’ve 
said goodbye to a lot of my pals in recent years. I guess it’s an occupational 
hazard at this point in my life.

If I’d have known how much fun fatherhood would be, I would have started way 
earlier than 45. I know that men can still father children into their late 
years, but we decided not to. My daughter is a great kid.

Films are one of my greatest loves. Old films, with proper film stars like 
John Wayne and Dean Martin. You don’t get screen stars of that magnitude any 
more. Most of them couldn’t chew gum and fart at the same time.

I’m writing more poetry now than ever because the world is infuriating. My 
poetry can come from anger at something on the telly or the radio, and then it 
just blurts out. It’s always about real stuff – I don’t have time for fiction 
or fantasy.

I’m a total control freak. If I wasn’t a poet, I’d probably be some tin-pot 
dictator of a banana republic. Whatever I do, I’ve got to be in charge.

I’ve turned into my dad. He was always a bit of a comedian. My aunts used to 
say that I was a miniature version of him and encouraged me to be entertaining, 
but it’s only now when I bet on a horse or have a drink that I see that I’m 
actually morphing into him.

I look like a ruined matinée idol. I fucking hate getting old, but it’s too 
late to complain – I’m already there.

Dr John Cooper Clarke will be performing at the Larmer Tree Festival on Friday 
15 July (larmertreefestival.co.uk <http://larmertreefestival.co.uk/>)
