
Will eating more fruit and vegetables make me thin?

Want to get thin? Eat more fruit and vegetables – they’re a low-calorie way of 
filling up, right?The health site WebMD has “eat more fruit and vegetables”  
<http://www.webmd.com/diet/ss/slideshow-best-diet-tips-ever>as one of its “22 
best diet tips ever” and the next US Dietary Guidelines are likely to push a 
“healthy Mediterranean-style diet”, big on plant-based food, to avoid more 
people becoming super-sized. But dietary advice being notoriously fickle, a 
research paper in this month’s PLOS Medicine says that eating more fruit and 
vegetablesdoesn’t necessarily help weight loss 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1001878>
: it depends which ones you eat. Eating starchy vegetables such as corn and 
potatoes (boiled, mashed or baked – the amount of butter added unknown) was 
linked to weight gain. Eating more high-fibre, lower-glycemic vegetables such 
as broccoli and brussels sprouts was associated with weight loss. 
Lower-glycemic foods do not raise blood sugar levels as much as higher ones. So 
should you stick to non-starchy vegetables and is most fruit still a slimming 
aid?

The solution

The study, from Harvard University, looked at changes in the intake of 
specific fruit and vegetables recorded in the dietary questionnaires of 133,468 
US men and women over 24 years. It took into account other lifestyle factors 
that affect weight, such as smoking, amount of sleep, hours watching television 
and exercise. Dr Monica L Bertoia, the lead author, says that, in America, the 
most common choices of fruit and vegetables are orange juice and potatoes. 
“There are many fruits and vegetables that may be better choices for the 
prevention of weight gain, such as apples, pears, berries and non-starchy 
vegetables,” she says.

The idea of eating more fruit and vegetables to lose weight only works if you 
eat less of something else – all calories count.A study last year from the 
University of Alabama 
<http://www.ajcn.org/cgi/pmidlookup?view=long&pmid=24965308>, looking at 
previous research on weight loss and increased fruit and vegetable intake in 
more than 1,200 people, found that people who didn’t reduce their calorie 
intake overall did not lose weight.

Different fruit and vegetables have different characteristics – lower-glycemic 
foods cause fewer and smaller blood sugar spikes and may reduce hunger. So if 
you want high-fibre, low-glycemic fruit, go for blueberries and avocados. 
Strawberries are low on fibre but good on the low-glycemic scale, as is 
grapefruit – unless you pour sugar on it. Pears and apples came out well, even 
though they have a high-glycemic index – their higher fibre may compensate. For 
vegetables, try sprouts (without crispy bacon), broccoli, tofu, cauliflower and 
sweet potatoes or yams rather than potatoes. But remember, they all still have 
calories.
