
Fake fur

The clothes on the catwalk are to be sold next spring and summer. The weather, 
asLondon fashion week <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/london-fashion-week> 
opens, is glorious Indian summer sunshine. But fashion refuses to be tethered 
by such details. Fake fur coats are set to be a major designer and high street 
trend this season, and many showgoers braved the heat and sported their faux. 
The new fake furs are more cookie-monster than trophy wife: think crazy colours 
and boxy shapes.

The cult of the faux-fur Shrimps label was confirmed by the attendance of 
Alexa Chung <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung>, wearing white 
dungarees accessorised with a furry clutch at the tiny presentation. Next 
summer the Shrimps girl will be wearing a silk pyjama blouse, with a slim fur 
scarf and furry ankle strap sandals.
 J. JS Lee showed white loafers. Photograph: Ray Tang/REX 
Flat shoes

Gone are the days of worrying about how many models will fall flat on their 
faces as they wobble like baby giraffes in six-inch sandals. Flat shoes rule on 
and off the catwalk. J. JS Lee showed flat, pointed white loafers; Eudon Choi 
featured flat Moroccan slippers with subtle stripes. As a result, the confident 
stride is the new catwalk sashay.

Meanwhile, front row shoes are stubbornly flat. Where the audience were once 
shod in spiky Louboutins and delicate Manolos, the practical shoe is now a 
major trend. Sandals, loafers, espadrilles and trainers – even, shock horror, 
the non-designer-limited-edition kind – are everywhere.
 Models on the catwalk for Bora Aksu, showing the ruffles he based on Queen 
Victoria's paper dolls. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
Ruffles and pleats
 Blogger Amy Valentine sports the growing trend for pink hair. Photograph: 
Justin Tallis/PA 
Think minimal, not girly. Bora Aksu decorated his collection with fluid, 
translucent frills, a detail which he based on Queen Victoria's collection of 
paper dolls. At Eudon Choi the ruffles were attached to striped oversized 
shirting and tailoring, which mixed linen and Liberty print. J. JS Lee went for 
a post-Celine pleat: think navy blue utilitarian silk pieces, with the addition 
of pleats to lift them out of the ordinary. Her pleats on a mesh-dress had a 
retro tennis-court feel. At Daks, billowing lilac chiffon trains and pleated 
lilac tops were worn with tailored bermuda shorts; at Trager Delaney, 
knife-pleated skirts were teamed with crew-neck sweaters and flat sandals.
 Louis Vuitton's bucket bag. Photograph: Helen Seamons 
Pink hair

Pink hair as a statement of glamorous feminine rebellion hasn't been this big 
since Zandra Rhodes's heyday. Model Charlotte Free began an on-catwalk trend 
for pastel hair three years ago, a baton now picked up by the rainbow-locked 
Chloe Norgaard. Rihanna andKaty Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/katy-perry> have both been photographed with 
pink hair, and Rita Ora sports the trend in the advertising campaign for her 
recent fashion collaboration with Adidas. The showgoing crowd – always on the 
lookout for an accessory that will prove their individual style and get the 
streetstyle photographers snapping – have taken to the trend like ducks to 
water. Or should that be flamingos?

The bucket bag

The front row has a new breakout It bag. A bucket-shaped bag with a drawstring 
fastening is being spotted on anyone who's anyone. Vogue editor Sarah Harris 
has aLouis Vuitton <http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/louis-vuitton> one, 
while the New York fashion industry's obsession with Mansur Gavriel's simple, 
clean-luxe bucket bags has well and truly arrived, with several stylists and 
editors toting the label on day one of London fashion week. It can only be a 
matter of hours until the style is spotted on a London catwalk.
