
One advertised job in development or human rights can get hundreds of 
applications and everyone wants to stand out. But you don’t want to stand out 
for the wrong reasons. We asked a panel of recruiters in the sector to share 
their advice on what not to include on your application.

The panel

 * Graham Salisbury, head of human resources, Action Aid 
<http://www.actionaid.org.uk/>

 * Michael Wright, director of membership and communications, Bond 
<http://www.bond.org.uk/>

 * Louise Court, head of human resources, Amnesty International 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/>

“The worst cover letter I ever received was one where the applicant included a 
picture of their entire family tree just to point out they were related to some 
great social campaigner,” recalls Graham Salisbury. “But I wanted to interview 
him, not his great grandfather.”

Michael Wright says that, from a recruiter’s perspective: “You’re always 
looking for means to cut the pile of job applications rapidly, so if there’s a 
spelling mistake or if the text is too dense, I’m going to put their CV to one 
side – they’re making me work too hard.”

But how else can you avoid ending up in the rejects pile?

Don’t think you’re God’s gift to development

“I’ve definitely seen young people come through who are over-confident about 
their value to us,” says Wright. “Just assuming because you’ve got a degree in 
politics from a good university that you’re an amazing commodity is stupid when 
you’re competing against applicants from the whole of the EU who also have 
vocational experience.”

Related: 12 tips for getting a job in international development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/aug/26/international-development-career-advice-tips>

Don’t say you want to ‘save the world’

Be clever about your skill set, what you’ve achieved, what your value to us 
is. Don’t go over the top – we’ve had applications that while well meaning 
border on cringey, says Court. “People talking about wanting to work at Amnesty 
‘all their life’ or start their application with ‘I would be deeply honoured 
and indebted to work for you’.”

Don’t talk about ‘wanting to give back’

“The charity sector does attract people coming towards the end of their career 
and these people often make it sound like a huge sacrifice that they’re giving 
up their six-figure salary to come work for us,” says Salisbury. “I once had a 
bloke who didn’t want to be a dentist anymore so sent me a CV to apply to be a 
campaigns officer.” If you’re a career changer, focus on the unique skill set 
you can bring instead – and apply for a role you’re qualified for.

Don’t rely on a CV you wrote in 1998

For older applicants who’ve held the same role for a long time, Wright says, 
talk to your colleagues who’ve applied for jobs more recently about how the 
process has changed.


Don’t be a cyber candidate only

If you’re interested in an organisation, get face-to-face time as soon as 
possible. Track down someone from the specific department you want to work for, 
advises Wright.

Don’t cut and paste cover letters to different organisations

“One candidate once wrote to me saying his life long ambition was to work for 
Oxfam,” says Salisbury. “He was applying for a job with Action Aid.” Sending 
out lots of applications at one time may give you a big buzz but it also hits 
harder when all the rejections come back. Tailor applications to a few places 
where you realistically have a chance.

Related: How not to apply for a job in development 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/12/how-not-to-apply-for-a-job-in-development>

Don’t lie on yes/no questions


If you answer no to a killer question on an online application form, don’t go 
back and change your answers to say you speak Portuguese, have the right to 
work in the UK and have five years’ project management experience. This has 
been a big issue with international applicants, according to Salisbury.

Don’t use pointless jargon

“Stuff like ‘I’m a high-achieving, task-focused, self-starter’ is a lot of 
meaningless rubbish,” says Wright. “I’m left just thinking ‘who is this?’ 
Applicants need to relax and be more confident in being themselves.”

Don’t waffle

This applies to job applications and interviews, according to Court. You need 
to get quickly to the competencies.

Don’t pigeonhole yourself into one role

“On the flip side, I’ve found applicants are often too restrictive on their 
cover letters about their goals and how they can fit into the sector,” says 
Wright. “There’s a huge diversity of jobs in development but people tend to 
ignore IT roles, marketing, even fundraising. There’s lots of evidence you can 
move departments once you’ve got that first role, but right now one-third of 
all jobs are in fundraising.”

Don’t be the person with the 15-page CV

“I’ve had so many bad CVs, ones with no punctuation and whole words missing, 
but I’ve also had 15-page CVs with affidavits, testimonials and their PhD 
thesis attached,” says Wright.

Related: Development: not for people from different work and ethnic 
backgrounds? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/sep/01/diversity-international-development-ngos>

Don’t go to an interview unprepared to talk about what the organisation does

“The trait that annoys me most in job applicants is the alarming lack of 
research some do,” says Wright. “One of the first interview questions I’ll ask 
applicants is ‘Can you tell me a little bit about what Bond does?’ It’s an easy 
question but it’s often one people fail and it’s really off putting to an 
interviewer when people don’t even have a good understanding of what we do.”

Don’t say ‘we’ when you mean ‘I’

“When asked to talk about a project you’ve worked on, replying with ‘Well, we 
did…’ suggests to us that you didn’t make a significant contribution,” says 
Court.

Don’t ask questions to demonstrate what you already know

“I’ve interviewed people for entry-level roles and they’ve started questions 
with: ‘I see in your annual report you mentioned XYZ… what’s the organisation’s 
five-year strategy for this?’”, recalls Salisbury. Ask questions that show 
you’re genuinely looking for information.

But... do put yourself in your recruiter’s shoes

 “People we’ve rejected sometimes try to open up a dialogue but it’s really 
frustrating when people ask for feedback repeatedly,” says Wright. “We recently 
recruited for a junior administrative and research role, for which we got 270 
applications. How long do applicants think we spend on them?” Don’t let things 
as basic as not following instructions on the application knock you out of the 
race.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
