
Meet the original suffragette: Mary Wollstonecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mary-wollstonecraft>. The founder of 
feminism, a philosopher, travel writer, human rights activist, she was a 
profound influence on the Romantics, and an educational pioneer. In Virginia 
Woolf’s words, “we hear her voice and trace her influence even now among the 
living.” This may be true, but it’s not as true as I’d like. The writer of 
Vindication of the Rights of Men (1790) and Vindication of the Rights of Woman 
(1792) sank into relative obscurity after her death, aged 38. Why?

Wollstonecraft was born in 1759 into a picturesquely bleak family. She had a 
violent alcoholic father, and a weak, unsympathetic mother. Despite her 
inauspicious beginnings, she dragged herself upwards, eventually becoming a 
self-supporting bestselling international human-rights celebrity. The 
self-supporting bit is key – for her, independence was “the grand blessing of 
life”.

She argued, apparently outrageously, that women were capable of reason – all 
they lacked was education. An early role model, she translated and reviewed 
essays on natural history, and she was speaking the language of human rights 
before the term existed. She didn’t exclude men, or indeed anyone. Perhaps her 
most quotable maxim is “I do not wish [women] to have power over men, but over 
themselves.”

Wollstonecraft saw marriage as slavery and had her first child out of wedlock. 
When she set off on a mysterious mission, chasing a Norwegian captain along the 
treacherous shores of the Skagerrak, she took her baby with her. And knocked 
off a bestseller along the way. Has there been another treasure-hunting single 
mum philosopher on the high seas?

Related: Why the suffragettes still matter: 'they dared to act as the equals 
of men' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/19/suffragettes-why-still-matter-abi-morgan-film-writers-reflect>

But Wollstonecraft died not one, but two deaths. First in childbirth, bringing 
the author Mary Shelley into the world – the agonising post-partum infection 
took 10 days to finish her off. She left behind two daughters and a devastated 
husband, the anarchist philosopher William Godwin.

Godwin, still grieving, wrote her first biography. And in doing so, he 
unwittingly brought about Wollstonecraft’s second death: her reputation was 
killed in the scandal following the revelation of her unconventional life and 
loves. Overnight she became toxic. The shockwaves were massive, and lasting. 
Wollstonecraft’s enemies couldn’t contain their glee: here was proof 
irrefutable that she was a whore, a “hyena in petticoats” as Horace Walpole 
described her.

Scurrilous poems did the rounds, including an exceptionally unpleasant piece 
of work called The Un-sex’d Females. This was poetry functioning as an 
18th-century Twitter: mocking Wollstonecraft as a “poor maniac” a “voluptuous” 
victim of “licentious love.” The author also crowed that “she died a death that 
strongly marked the distinction of the sexes, by pointing out the destiny of 
women, and the diseases to which they are liable.” In that oldest of 
misogynistic chestnuts: she was asking for it. She was a trouble-maker, and she 
died a woman’s death. Take note, ladies!

Even Wollstonecraft’s friends and allies stepped back; silenced, shaking their 
heads. Wollstonecraft’s legacy was trashed for well over a century and even 
today, despite a number of outstanding modern biographies, there’s still no 
significant memorial to her anywhere.

Mary on the Green is the campaign for a statue of Wollstonecraft in the north 
London area of Stoke Newington, where she lived, worked, and founded a school. 
The historian Mary Beard wrote in support that “every woman who wants to make a 
difference to how this country is run, from the House of Commons to the pub 
quiz, has Mary Wollstonecraft to thank”.

In Search of Mary by Bee Rowlatt (Alma Books) is out on 15 October. Further 
information: www.maryonthegreen.org.

• This article was amended on 6 October 2015. An earlier version gave the 
title of one of her works as Vindication of the Rights ofWomen 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> (1792). This has been corrected.

