
The dilemma My husband of 10 years has become obsessed with fitness. He has 
always had a fanatical nature, but the fitness phase is getting extreme. He’s 
at the gym twice a day – swimming in the morning and again after work for up to 
two hours. Our living room is cluttered with dumbbells and our small kitchen 
has been overtaken by tubs of protein (he hides them when we have guests). He 
doesn’t have the time to help me around the flat and he’s slashed sugar and 
carbohydrates from his diet, so I can’t cook anything meat-free or too carby. 
As he’s leaving for a workout he jokes that he’s “off to get some self-respect” 
– but now I think he actually believes it…

Mariella replies Now that’s a conundrum – although there are plenty who would 
prefer to contend with your problem rather than their own slothlike husbands’ 
unhealthy lifestyles. It’s hard to say: “You’re just too fit” in a way that 
does justice to your obvious frustration. Whatever way I try it, the phrase 
trips off my tongue as a compliment and even perhaps a leer.

In an age when privileged humanity is battling against biology, putting 
enormous effort into turning back the clock, pushing our bodies to their 
physical limits and trying to live for ever, your husband sounds like a natural 
product of his time. Men’s magazines, once littered with offensive examples of 
objectification, now barely bother with the female form, they’re so busy 
objectifying their own sex. That once iconic bible to male testosteronePlayboy 
recently dropped the female full frontal, and I wonder if they’d fare better if 
they replaced their bunny centrefolds with latterday Adonises, allowing readers 
a closer look at the glories of their own male perfection.

James Bond (Timothy Dalton and George Lazenby apart) has maintained his pole 
position as a world-class action hero because his creators have always managed 
to ensure each new manifestation encapsulated the aspirational male attributes 
of the day. So take that journey from rugged Sean Connery to the postmodern 
twinkle of perfect Pierce and then look at Daniel Craig in his skin-tight suits 
and biceps bulging through his body-hugging handmade shirts. With worship of 
the male form exceeding even Renaissance heights, this Bond is definitely 
today’s man.

When I was a girl, a boy who even glanced in a mirror was considered suspect 
(David Bowie excepted), whereas now, from an early age, they have to be prised 
away from them. The girls in my daughter’s class are going through a braiding 
frenzy at present, but it’s nothing compared to the hours of dedicated work the 
boys put in creating quiffs at perilous slants, hairy homages to Table Mountain 
and further eye-catching examples of what you can do with a full head of hair, 
imagination, a football annual and little else to take up your time.

Not since 1950s housewives used long hours with the stylist to stave off 
terminal boredom have such exuberant crowning glories braved the high street. 
No wonder boys aren’t doing as well as girls academically: they’re way too 
preoccupied with their hairstyles. Which is sad really, because you’d have 
hoped that the journey to a more equal world would have seen both sexes embrace 
the best of the opposite sex, not the worst. Instead of women adopting the more 
relaxed approach to personal grooming favoured by centuries of men, what seems 
to have happened is that men have fallen hook, line and sinker for the beauty 
industry. Pomaded and lacquered, buffed, bronzed and toned to within a hair’s 
breath of caricature and beyond, the seduction of the male of the species by 
the most frivolous of human concerns seems a done deal. It’s been a salutary 
lesson in human nature to see sensible men slipping to such superficial lows, 
but then again I don’t own a gym or a male-grooming range.

What contemporary men share with the housewife of yesteryear is time to kill. 
You can only hoover the front room so many times, as those Valium-popping 
domestic goddesses knew only too well. Today’s male, with the responsibility of 
earning a livelihood at the very least halved, and with his female counterpart 
in most cases still doing all the domestic chores, is in no doubt looking for 
something to keep himself busy. My suggestion would be to stop with the 
drudgery of those meat-heavy, carb- free meals, the admin and the housework and 
liberate yourself from playing tertiary industry to your iron-pumping husband 
and see if that shakes him from his “self-respecting” reverie. If he doesn’t 
quit the body building when you’ve withdrawn all facilitating services, then 
you know he’s a lost cause until he signs up for weightlifters anonymous. 
Spending protracted time at the gym is no sin so long as you’re pulling equal 
weight at home. Anything else is a deal breaker.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
