
The centenary of the first world war has inspired a range of reactions – 
arguably, the most resonant of these have been cultural expressions, rather 
than conventional history lessons. Millions of people have been moved by art 
commissions such as the iconic poppies sculptures by artist Paul Cummins and 
designer Tom Piper, exhibited originally as part of the installation Blood 
Swept Lands and Seas of Red at the Tower of London in 2014.

“The first world war is etched in our minds through the art that came out of 
that period: the poetry of Siegfried Sassoon and Wilfred Owen; the paintings of 
Paul Nash, and many works of music,” explains Jenny Waldman, director of 14-18 
NOW. “The most appropriate response seemed to be to invite contemporary artists 
to explore and respond to our heritage.”
 <>

Related: Mightier than the sword: a fresh take on first world war poetry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-art-of-1418-now/2016/may/27/mightier-than-the-sword-a-fresh-take-on-first-world-war-poetry>

This year, 14-18 NOW reaches the second of its three “seasons”, marking the 100
th anniversaries of the Battle of the Somme, the Easter Rising and the Battle 
of Jutland, with multi-arts events ranging from live music, literature and 
theatre to visual art exhibitions, a fourth Dazzle Ship and a graphic novel. 
The locations extend throughout the UK; the themes and award-winning 
collaborators are genuinely international, from Irish poet Paul Muldoon to 
British-Nigerian sculptor Yinka Shonibare MBE, Belgrade-born fashion designer 
Roksanda Ilincic and Pakistani painter Imran Qureshi, highlighting the first 
world war’s far-reaching effects. The brutality of war is documented, but so is 
its transformative impact, from multicultural Britain to women’s rights as 
workers, and eventually, voters. In fact, Waldman notes that many current 
newspaper headlines, including Britain’s place in Europe, connect to the first 
world war.

“We wanted to commission extraordinary art experiences,” she says. “It’s also 
a huge tribute to how dynamic the contemporary arts are in this country. We 
partner with brilliant arts organisations across the UK, and we particularly 
wanted to reach people who might not feel a connection with the first world 
war. Many of the events are free and in outdoor public spaces.”

Waldman describes 14-18 NOW as an “artist-led” project, and there is a sense 
of deep emotional investment in the works created, which in turn prompts huge 
audience empathy. The artists here often explore histories linked to their own 
heritage, and many have drawn from 14-18 NOW’s research agreement with the 
Imperial War Museum. British writer Simon Armitage was moved by aerial 
photographs of first world war battlefields to create a series of new poems; 
British Asian actor and artistic director Ajay Chhabra presents an installation 
revealing how Brighton Pavilion was used as a wartime hospital for wounded 
Indian soldiers; Irish artist Anne Tallentire’s Shelter project looks at the 
Nissen hut structures originally associated with first world war army barracks, 
and now used to house 21st-century refugees fleeing war.

“Contemporary artists have a different approach to memorial; they tend to be 
less about casting a monument, and more about capturing a moment of reflection, 
and involving people,” says Waldman. “It’s looking at the past through the 
prism of the present. We’ve been overwhelmed by the numbers who’ve engaged with 
14-18 NOW’s projects, and the multi-generational stories that families share.”

For our pick of the best ten events of 14-18 NOW, see here 
<http://www.theguardian.com/the-art-of-1418-now/2016/may/27/10-of-the-best-14-18-now>
