
The dilemma I am a 50-something well-educated man, married for nearly 30 
years, with two children at university. For the past 15 years I have been 
unhappy in my relationship with my wife. There has been a constant difference 
of philosophy in bringing up the children: adventure versus cotton wool, 
exploration versus stay at home, achievement versus comfort zone, confidence 
versus reliance. Recently I was subjected to a long rant (not the first) in 
which she said I should drop my job, which includes lots of travelling, 
sometimes for long periods. It ended with a “me or your job” ultimatum. I have 
stayed this long for the kids. I would leave, but I am worried about the effect 
on their lives.

Mariella replies I’m not a stick-together-at-all-costs sort of person, but I 
don’t often advise the opposite either. Thirty years of marriage and two grown 
kids is quite a feat and agreeing on how to raise them is now a redundant 
argument, as your opportunities for influencing them slowly dissipate. That 
doesn’t mean that you don’t have the right, the reasons and the impetus to get 
the hell out.

I blame it less on your partner and more on medical science and healthier 
lifestyles. The reason a golden wedding anniversary attracts so much attention 
is that it’s meant to be rare. “Till death us do part” is a noble aspiration, 
but it dates back to the days when you weren’t committing to much more than a 
couple of decades. Nowadays, if you’re young and a fool for love, you could tie 
the knot at 18, leaving yourself with 70 years or more to “enjoy” the company 
of your “one and only”. For many that is more of a life sentence than a 
romantic idyll, and though such staying power represents an admirable ambition, 
it’s nigh on impossible to live up to.

If we’re increasingly headed towards life expectancies of up to a century, an 
awful lot of what we take for granted when it comes to jobs, children and 
mating needs to be examined. For a start, when attempting such Olympian heights 
of relationship longevity, regular reassessment periods – making departure a 
less complicated, messy and emotionally wearing process than divorce – would be 
an improvement on the current contract. How about creating a nuptial contract 
renewable on a 10-year basis and marking each passing decade that you stay 
together with a party for all those who have helped you stay the course, from 
in-laws and friends, to children and exes? Rather than token gifts for 
longevity of tenure, how about a “get out of jail free” card that you can 
choose to use or lose every decade? That way you offer incentives to each other 
and to those around you to keep the marriage boat afloat. One wedding, one 
reception and then a lifetime together with no punctuation, rolling along like 
waves on a beach, seems an altogether measly ratio of enjoyment to commitment.

I’m not making light of your dilemma, but instead illustrating what a good 
innings you’ve put in and why you have every right to at least ponder your 
options for the next half of your earthly existence. More people get divorced 
and come out in their 50s than at any other age, so you’ll be awash with single 
contemporaries and just one of many choosing to plod a new path. Obviously I’m 
not going to side with you on the reasons for your disgruntlement. Your gripes 
will be as subjective as every aggrieved lover’s complaint list. Nevertheless 
what you feel is as important as what’s real in such circumstances, and you 
clearly consider yourself to be much put upon.

Before you make any rash decisions it’s also a good idea to consider the 
opposite point of view. Don’t leave because you’re fed up or feeling sorry for 
yourself. Leave because you’ve come to a point where, rather than seeing your 
relationship improving thanks to your new-found freedom from the friction of 
co-parenting and the onerous financial responsibilities that come with it, you 
judge happiness to lie outside rather than within your home. You mention being 
subjected to a “long rant” from your spouse in which she asked you to choose 
between your job and your marriage. In the circumstances I can’t help wondering 
if she’s identified where the competition lies. Have you considered that she 
cares enough to want you to herself – contentment with the status quo not 
shared by too many women after three decades with one man?

I can’t tell you to stay, or give you permission to leave, I can only 
encourage you to think in a less linear way about your relationship before you 
chuck 30 years of hard-earned companionship out of the window. Then again, with 
the likelihood of another 30 to go, you’ve got plenty of time to start all over 
again. As for your kids, they’re close to adulthood now and will be making 
their own nests pretty soon, with little care for your opinions on their 
lifestyle choices. Of course they generally prefer things to stay as they are, 
but they also adapt pretty well to change, so long as it’s handled with 
kindness, sensitivity and there’s something in it for them – like two homes 
where they can get their laundry done instead of one.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
