 'Oh yes," said the lady behind the counter of Nettleton post office. "People 
come asking for Darren's meat. 'Have you got any of Darren's meat?' they say." 
I trust the lady behind the counter. She should know what decent meat is. The 
Nettleton post office won an award for being one of the best village stores in 
the country, with plenty of local produce on its well-stuffed shelves and 
cabinets. It's a joy that the shop is treasured by the local people. "It's a 
great place for keeping in touch," says a customer. "It's got the personal 
touch."
The source of Darren's meat is just a few miles away. Millbrook Edmund Mill, 
better known as Derek, is surrounded by Nancy, Hilary, Jemima, Jocelyn, 
Primrose, Jessica, Florence, Meg, Molly, Flori and Frilly. He stands hock-deep 
in rich grass lit here and there by buttercups and clover. Beyond the hedge 
that borders his field, the land falls away to more fields of holly-green wheat 
and scorching yellow rape, and intersecting bolsters of further hedges and 
small coppices. Behind one the square tower of the church at Badminton pokes up.

Derek's a handsome chap, his broad forehead tufted with curly black hair, not 
unlike an untended mullet. His back is long and straight, his chest deep, legs 
well muscled, his colour unbroken black with a russet tinge. He looks like a 
solid black rectangle on four legs, the model of a pure Welsh Black bull, "a 
lot of meat on short legs," says Darren Luton, the provider of Darren's meat. 
Derek moves with the certitude of a creature who knows he is lord of all he 
surveys, which he is. The brisk wind ruffles the long hair on his flanks and 
sides. "He's an easy-going gent," says Darren, regarding Derek, the ladies and 
three calves with affection.

Darren manages 2,500 acres that make up West Kington Far, on the 
Wiltshire/Gloucestershire border. A good deal of the land is given over to 
wheat, and there's another herd of cattle, too, but the 120 Welsh Blacks are 
Darren's pride and joy.

"I started the herd seven years ago. I wanted something native, a breed that 
didn't need much looking after," he says, looking at them fondly. "They can 
stay out all year long because they were bred for the Welsh hills. And they 
make incredibly good mothers. They get very protective of their calves. And 
they're a lot of cow on short legs."

Maternal or not, the purpose is to produce eating animals. They live off the 
fat of the land until they are two or so years old, then it's off to the 
abattoir with them, two by two.

"I send them in pairs, with a friend," says Darren. "They get less stressed 
that way." Darren is particular about caring for his animals at each stage of 
their lives. It's not just sentiment. "Give them the best life, they'll give 
you the best meat," he says. And they do, easy with sweet fat, hefty with 
flavour.

Darren is lucky that one of the few small local abattoirs left in this part of 
the world is at Eastington, about 20 minutes away. There's no long, disturbing 
trek across the country for his cattle. "I'm particular about the slaughter. I 
take them at 10 o'clock in the morning, and I know they're gone by 11."

But the care of the animals doesn't stop at the farm gate. The carcasses are 
hung for a week at the abattoir, then taken to Marshfield farm, where Dawn 
Brook farms organic Aberdeen Angus/Hereford crosses, pigs, sheep and chickens, 
and butchers her own and other farmers' meat, making sure the meat is hung 
properly, two more weeks at least in the case of Darren's Welsh Black beef.

And from Marshfield it goes to Bath and Bristol farmers' markets, or back to 
Darren, or to the post office at Nettleton - which is where I came in.

"Darren's meat - it's on the third shelf down," says the lady behind the 
counter.

"Thanks very much."
