
On 11 February 1901, an ambitious young man wrote to the home secretary, Sir 
Matthew Ridley, from his home at 53 Fielden Street, Manchester: "Dear Sir, I 
wish to inform you that I should be very thankfull [sic] if you would accept me 
as one of the public executioner's should at any time Mr Billington's term 
expires as I have always had a desire for that appointment. I am 24 years of 
age, height 5ft 8½ inches. Should you require particulars of my character I 
shall be very glad to give you all the information you require. Hoping the 
application will be of no offence."

The determined applicant had been apprenticed as a butcher and was working as 
a cabinet-maker, but he had become obsessed with the life and work of England's 
chief executioner, James Billington. He wanted to be like him. His name was 
Henry Albert Pierrepoint.

It just so happened that Pierrepoint was the right man in the right place at 
the right time. On 18 February, Ridley wrote to the governor of Strangeways 
prison, asking him to summon Pierrepoint for an interview. The interview took 
place and Pierrepoint was appointed. He was duly sent for six days training at 
Newgate prison in London and within nine months of penning his letter he had 
achieved his dream, assisting his hero Billington at the execution of Marcel 
Fougeron at Newgate on 19 November. The reign of the Pierrepoint family of 
executioners had begun. It was to last for 55 years.

Steve Fielding sketches the outline of the family story in Pierrepoint: A 
Family of Executioners, The Story of Britain's Infamous Hangmen 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Pierrepoint-Family-Executioners-Steve-Fielding/dp/1844541924>
 (2006). The book is as much a history of the executed as of the executioners. 
During his time as assistant and then chief executioner, Henry carried out 105 
executions. His brother Thomas, who succeeded him in the role, executed 294. 
And Henry's son Albert executed 435, including William Joyce (Lord Haw-Haw), 
Derek Bentley and Ruth Ellis. Between them, the Pierrepoints carried out more 
than 800 executions. Most were men and most had been convicted of murder, 
although Thomas and Albert also executed some prisoners who had been convicted 
of treason.

Albert executed more than 200 people under the rules of the war crimes 
commission after the second world war. Albert was not merely an executioner – 
he was regarded by many as a hero.

But it was grim work. Fielding describes the family profession thus: "Just 
before the time of the execution, the executioner and his assistant join the 
... prison officials outside the door of the condemned cell ... the executioner 
enters the cell and pinions the prisoner's arms behind his back, and two 
officers lead him to the scaffold and place him directly across the division of 
the trap on a spot previously marked with chalk. The assistant executioner 
pinions the legs, while the executioner puts a white cap over his head and fits 
the noose round his neck with the knot drawn tight on the left lower jaw, where 
it is held in position by a sliding ring. The executioner then pulls the lever."

Albert claimed that he could carry out an execution in eight seconds. The rest 
of the time he ran a pub with his wife Anne – their first pub, in Hollinwood, 
near Oldham, was called Help the Poor Struggler. (But it did not, as legend has 
it, sport the sign "No hanging around the bar".) Pierrepoint retired in 1956. 
In his autobiography, Executioner (1974), he expressed regret about his life's 
work. "The fruit of my experience has this bitter after-taste: that I do not 
now believe that any of the hundreds of executions I carried out has in any way 
acted as a deterrent against future murder."

The second most famous family of executioners were the Sanson family, 
executioners of the French revolution.
