
She spent endless days and nights fleeing a warzone as a tiny child, first on 
foot through the darkness and then by boat after they shut the borders in her 
native Sierra Leone.

But when Yarrie Bangurra saw the camp she was supposed to be staying in, she 
couldn’t understand what it was her family had come to.

“It was isolated and rocky and dusty,” Yarrie, now 22, says. “There were just 
tents and people like us who had run from the war. It got me confused. We 
didn’t know what was happening from there.

“I was ill and I was shaking a lot. My mum thought it wasn’t safe for me in 
this environment.”


Like so many fleeing persecution throughout history, Yarrie was about to 
discover the journey of a refugee does not end as soon as you escape the 
conflict zone.

Protecting refugees like Yarrie is the core mandate of the UNHCR, the UN 
Refugee Agency originally set up in 1951 to help those waiting to return home 
after World War II.

Refugees are forced to flee. They have no other choice unlike most migrants 
who leave their homes voluntarily to improve living conditions.

To stay means risking their lives and freedoms because of conflict or 
persecution on the basis of race, religion, nationality, social or political 
grouping.

When Yarrie and her family fled the intense rebel fighting in Sierra Leone in 
the late 1990s, it was to be the start of years of hunger and hardship in 
neighbouring Guinea.

“I never dreamed of living in a camp,” she says today. “I was thinking why, 
why, why? Even now I have nightmares. When I hear the word ‘camping’ I get so 
scared and fearful even though I know it is a fun thing. Horrible things 
happened in that time of our lives.”

While conditions in the Kalya refugee camp in Guinea were difficult, it was 
here she first met UNHCR staff who came to her aid providing immediate support 
to help Yarrie and her family.

 The UNHCR staff were the ones she remembers providing her with food and 
shelter and also helping initiate the long process that would eventually lead 
to a new life across the seas in Australia.

The family left Africa on 9 November 2004 when Yarrie was 10 years old after 
the application to join her uncle and his wife in Sydney came through.

“When we arrived here I couldn’t believe my eyes,” she says. “I couldn’t stop 
looking I was so amazed. They had left the camp very skinny and in Australia 
they had put on some flesh. My uncle was looking good and he had his own car. I 
thought I’m in the right place now.

“I knew this was a place where my life would begin and my life would prosper. 
It was my new home.”

Of the unprecedented 60 million people currently displaced globally, 19.5 
million are classed as refugees, according to figures from early 2016.

Given the number of refugees compared to the available resettlement 
allocations, only 1% of refugees are able to be resettled in another country. 
Most spend many years in a camp, with the average stay being a staggering 17 
years.

Because of this reality, UNHCR is increasingly focused on the long-term needs 
of refugees. This includes access to education, income-generating activities, 
skills training and improved infrastructure and services in camps themselves.

While dealing with protracted refugee situations, UNHCR is also constantly 
dealing with new emergencies as they arise.

“As an agency we can move quickly when an emergency happens, and Australian 
support is assisting UNHCR being a first responder,” Australia for UNHCR 
National Director Naomi Steer says.

This support includes helping to fund emergency shelter, food, water and 
medicine, helping refugee families get the assistance they need in desperate 
times.

Support like this can save lives and give refugees like Yarrie a promising, 
transformative future.

She is in her second year studying international development at university 
while sharing her story to raise awareness as an Australia for UNHCR special 
youth representative.

“Sometimes I feel like I’m dreaming that all this is not real,” she says. “In 
Australia we struggle but it’s way better.

“My childhood was taken away and I didn’t have a choice. What I have is a scar 
that can never be covered but I’m happy and I’m lucky to be alive. I’m blessed 
to be living here in Australia.”

Inspired by UNHCR, she plans to use her opportunities to help others back in 
Sierra Leone to export their produce and improve their lives.

“We have to help one another,” she says. “We are all human beings at the end 
of the day. A refugee is just a person. UNHCR really shows that example, that’s 
why we love the organisation. They show that human beings matter to them, that 
life matters.

“Love and kindness changes people’s lives. In Australia I have found that love 
again in different people. It means I am not alone.”
