
After leaving the West Midlands for a life of adventure, I found myself 
hitchhiking around the United States in early 1980. I was 28 at the time. On 
arriving in San Francisco, I had a clear choice between keeping the last few 
dollars I had or finding somewhere to sleep. Luckily, I found an empty skip and 
decided to stay there for a few days.

A week later, I moved to Los Angeles, where I’d been offered a job driving an 
ice-cream van for a company called Mr Jumbo’s. On my first day at work, I 
picked up the van and was given Watts County as my beat. I didn’t know a lot 
about the area, other than having read aboutthe race riots in 1965 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/aug/11/usa.danglaister>.

My first shift was going well until I ran out of bananas – banana split was 
the only thing I’d been selling all day. I stepped out of the van to get more 
from a liquor store. When I came back, I found myself standing on the sidewalk 
with a bunch of bananas in my hand and no van.

I phoned the company and they were not happy. I decided that I had no option 
but to leg it, and made my way to Santa Monica Boulevard with a view to 
hitching back into town.

After about 30 minutes, a red Ford Pinto stopped for me. I opened the door and 
got in. The driver didn’t say anything and just nodded when I said I wanted to 
go downtown. He wasn’t physically imposing, but he was squat and well-built. He 
was clean-shaven, with short hair – a swarthy-looking bloke. There was no 
recognisable smell in the car, but the bad vibe this man gave off was almost 
overpowering.

A mile or so into the journey, the man started muttering under his breath, 
cursing Palestine and Israel. He didn’t seem to notice that I was there.

I told him that I didn’t need to go any farther, and the car drifted to the 
side of the busy freeway and stopped. Suddenly, without a word, he took out a 
piece of cord, lunged across and wrapped it around my neck. I thought, “This 
is it – I’m dead.”

Somehow, I managed to get my fingers under the rope to stop him tightening it. 
He was strong, but out of desperation I managed to pull it away. I twisted 
around in the seat and kicked out, catching him in the groin. He fell back and 
started shouting. I somehow opened the door and stumbled out.

I lay there on the grass verge as he drove off, the car quickly disappearing. 
After a few moments, I saw a police cruiser and flagged it down. I got into the 
back of the car, told them the story and showed them the rope burn mark on my 
neck. I was shocked to learn that they knew of three or four people on the 
loose who were going around killing hitchhikers. The police asked me to 
describe my attacker and told me it was likely I’d come up against a man called
William Bonin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Bonin>, otherwise known as 
the Freeway Killer.

After I described the car he was in and which way he went, the police asked me 
to get out and set off after him. It was the last I heard from the police about 
the incident.

I was left standing on the side of the freeway in shock. The thought of 
hitching again made me sick, but I had no money and had to catch a ride back 
into town. I left Los Angeles shortly after that, hitching back across the 
country.

Afterwards, when people did stop to offer me a lift, I’d talk to them first. 
Bonin was the only scary encounter I’d had in the months I spent hitching, so I 
decided that those were, in a way, good odds.

Related: Experience: I donated half my liver to my father 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/05/experience-donated-half-my-liver-to-my-father>

He was caught 10 days after my escape. I heard the news on the radio and 
thought, “Thank God they got him.” Bonin was later convicted of killing 14 
people.

As far as I know, I’m the only surviving victim. Years later, I still wake up 
in the middle of the night, experiencing flashbacks. When I finally realise 
where I am, I’m always overwhelmed with gratitude to be awake, miles away from 
that highway.

• As told to Tom Ward

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
