
It's only when I arrive at the cafe where we're to meet that I realise I'm not 
sure whatKat Banyard <http://www.katbanyard.org/> looks like. Her anonymity 
presents an obvious practical problem – but the inconvenience is eclipsed by 
surprise. How odd to have known her name for years, and not her face – but I 
think that must be just as Banyard would like it.

Britain's leading young feminist is no Andrea Dworkin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2005/apr/12/guardianobituaries.gender> 
sloganist, dramatising defiance via dungarees, nor a gladiatorialGermaine Greer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/germainegreer> show-off, nor another glossy 
Naomi Wolf <http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/naomiwolf>. The young woman who 
presently approaches is self-effacing, serious and so cautiously considered 
that I think she can see quotation marks waiting to pounce on every sentence 
out of her mouth.

I spend the next hour trying to work out what's making her so apprehensive. In 
the end I decide it can only be fear of allowing any impression that she 
deserves personal credit for reviving the feminist movement in Britain today. 
If that's the case, then her nerves make more sense than I'd thought – because 
I'm afraid there's no way to write about Banyard without doing precisely that. 
At only 29, she has pulled off what to me at her age had looked impossible, 
inspiring a fresh wave of feminists without getting into a cat fight with the 
post-feminists of the 90s, or pretending all the old arguments are boringly 
obsolete, or having to make herself sufficiently sexy to be media friendly.

UK Feminista <http://ukfeminista.org.uk/>, the grassroots movement founded by 
Banyard, will bemarching on parliament 
<http://ukfeminista.org.uk/event-details/feministlobby/> on 24 October 
alongside other feminist groups such as the Fawcett Society, led by Helen 
Pankhurst, great-granddaughter of Emmeline and one of the Olympics 
suffragettes. When Pankhurst was recruited earlier this summer, Jacques Rogge 
was hailing the Games as"a major boost for gender equality" 
<http://www.ww.w.londonthenews.com/news/Sports/20120727/34062576/IOC-head-London-Olympics-boost-gender-equality.htm>
, and in the warm Olympics afterglow a mass lobby in protest at the erosion of 
women's rights had struck some as anachronistic. But since then we have seen 
the minister for women call for a reduction in the abortion limit to 20 weeks – 
and the secretary of state for health propose, apparently off the top of his 
head, a time limit of just 12 weeks. Suddenly the protest could not feel more 
timely nor more urgent.

"It shows we can never afford to be complacent about the right to an abortion. 
It's easy to become complacent, and then suddenly we see these attacks, and it 
brings home how important it is that we maintain a really strong pro choice 
movement. We need to speak out openly about our own experiences, because these 
ministers' statements are creating a hostile environment. One in three women 
have an abortion in their lifetime. The majority of the UK population support a 
woman's right to choose. All the main UK medical bodies support the current 
term limit. So it's just not true that the situation has changed in any way. It 
shows you that women's bodies are still battlegrounds."

It is now 45 years since the Abortion Act was passed. Very few young gay or 
black people or Muslims or disabled people would say that prejudice had been 
defeated, yet in the 90s it was commonplace for young women to declare sexism 
dead. Due in large part to Banyard's activism, this is beginning to change, but 
why does she think so many women had been convinced they had no need for 
feminism?

"Throughout the 90s and much of the noughties, we were sold a lie on an 
almighty scale. That equality had been won, that the battle was over, and now 
was the time to enjoy our rights. I think what really helped contribute to that 
was how institutions and corporations who rely on sexism, who rely on women's 
inequality, adapted and changed. And co-opted the language of feminism very, 
very cleverly. Feminists of previous generations really got these ideals of 
independence, equality and agency accepted as standards and values society 
holds dear. So this didn't escape the notice of people like Hugh Hefner, the 
sex industry, the beauty industry. They knew that to survive they had to adapt. 
So all of a sudden putting on makeup was a major route to empowerment; visiting 
or performing in a lapdancing club was evidence of your independence and how 
sexually liberated you were. The sex industry held itself up as the promised 
land of feminism. Everything that feminists had been fighting for – sexual 
liberation, economic independence, control over their own bodies and so forth. 
When in fact what they represented was the complete opposite of feminism.

"This neo-liberal ideology of choice being the ultimate test of whether or not 
something's OK did influence feminism itself, and really threatened to derail 
the movement. And the consequences are felt by absolutely everyone in society."
 Banyard (right) and fellow members of UK Feminista and Object protest against 
the opening of Playboy London in June 2011. Photograph: Nick Cunard/eyevine 
The sex industry of today, she says, would be unrecognisable to earlier 
generations of feminists. "Commercial sexual exploitation has been 
industrialised, on a global scale, and the profits for a small few at the top – 
pimps and pornographers – are astronomical."Pornography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pornography> is literally everywhere, yet 
in reality "it's a form of filmed prostitution" – and with the average age of a 
boy's first exposure to hardcore internet porn now just 11, its impact is "an 
issue we simply cannot ignore".

UK Feminista has worked hard with other groups such as Object 
<http://www.object.org.uk/> to re-categorise lapdancing clubs so they require 
special sex licences. But the implication of campaigns for tighter regulation 
of the sex industry, or better conditions for those working within it, might 
arguably be that it is OK, as long as the women are treated properly. Can there 
ever be such a thing as an OK sex industry?

"No. There can't. You can't commodify consent. The inherent harm at the heart 
of this transaction we see evidenced in the astronomical rates of 
post-traumatic stress disorder, which is a result of having repeated unwanted 
sex because you need the money. It's often argued that it's just like stacking 
shelves. That it is ordinary work, just like any other work. But if you're 
stacking shelves, is it a bit different if your manager says: 'Right, before 
you go at the end of your shift can you give me a blowjob?' Would you feel 
uncomfortable about that? It's the inherent harm of having repeated unwanted 
sex which lies at the heart of the problem."

Banyard regards the sex industry's male consumers as victims too. "I think 
their sexuality has been co-opted by a predatory sex industry, which distorts 
and exploits it for profit. A new generation of boys, the vast majority have 
watched hardcore pornography on the internet, so we have a generation of boys 
coming through whose first sexual experiences will be vicariously participating 
in prostitution. They are watching filmed prostitution and getting their ideas 
about sex from it. This is an industry dedicated to finding ways of getting men 
to come back and keep coming back for more, so it tends to be increasingly 
violent to keep upping that response."

Another way of looking at it would be less charitable. Offered limitless 
choice, it turns out that what men really want is the most violent, degrading, 
misogynist porn imaginable. Does that tell us something about men?

"Well, increasingly we are seeing men who are speaking out about it." I begin 
to see how deftly Banyard has learned to sidestep old accusations like 
man-hating which have tangled up so much past feminist thinking. "One young 
man, a friend, set up theAnti Porn Men Project <http://www.antipornmen.org/> 
because he was using pornography at university, as all of his mates did, and 
suddenly started to become very conscious of how it was filtering into his 
everyday life – the way he looked at women, the way he thought about sex, and 
this really started to jar with his notions of equality. I think that's the 
only way we'll start to move forward, if more and more men do actually stand up 
publicly and say this is exploitative, and a man's sexuality should not be 
based on the exploitation of a woman, and we need to take our notions of 
sexuality back from these predatory pornographers."

Everyone who has ever campaigned against pornography comes up against the same 
problem. If they want to stop people using porn, they must want censorship – 
and what kind of liberation movement calls for state control of individual 
liberty?

"In terms of what we do about it, I don't think there are simple answers." At 
first this sounds like a bit of a cop-out, until Banyard points out that our 
choice need not necessarily come down to a pornographic free-for-all versus 
nanny state censorship; we just haven't yet had the resources to develop other 
possibilities. "For me it's really important just to open up that conversation. 
The organisations that work on this are hugely underfunded, so the ability to 
conduct research, to provide a forum to develop policy, has been severely 
restricted. People see it as an inevitable aspect of our life that commercial 
sex is now firmly embedded in society, and the point is there's an alternative. 
It's not inevitable. As a society we can choose whether or not it exists."

Post-feminists became a lot more relaxed about pornography when Sex and the 
City <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0159206/>, widely celebrated as porn for 
women, came along. Now we're all enjoying it equally, the argument went, the 
problem's solved. Banyard offers a witheringly dry smile. "Well, equality of 
oppression is never a great strategy for liberation."

A similar argument is often made these days about the beauty industry. With 
more and more men getting waxed and manicured, surgically enhanced and 
elaborately styled, why are feminists still so bothered about body image?

"But if you look at the statistics of who is and isn't getting surgery it is 
90% women who are having their flesh cut, tucked, pulled, to fit the beauty 
ideal. Cosmetic surgery fundamentally is about businesses trying to convince 
people to get unnecessary, invasive, very risky surgery. They know as well as 
everyone else does that women hate their bodies on a massive scale, and the 
solution they offer is the knife; they don't say, actually, we need to change 
the culture which is fuelling the self-hate and making women feel like this. 
They say, cut up your body to fit the culture."

Some feminists think the solution to a beauty industry that makes women hate 
their bodies is more diversity. If all sorts of different shapes and sizes 
appeared in adverts and the media, women would soon stop feeling inadequate – a 
theory allegedly proven by the sensational success of aDove ad campaign 
<http://www.dove.us/Social-Mission/campaign-for-real-beauty.aspx> featuring 
"ordinary" women. "But it's still this notion that beauty is fundamental to 
women's identity," Banyard says. "It's still about objectification and 
commodification. And the product itself they were selling" – a body lotion 
promising to firm up wobbly flesh – "kind of undermined their claims."

Susie Orbach's public endorsement <http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/news/481078/> 
of the Dove campaign suggested to me tactical feminist pragmatism. To challenge 
an entire culture of objectification is monumentally ambitious; to make it 
slightly less damaging is more doable. But it runs the risk of validating the 
very thing you wish did not exist, so I ask where Banyard sits on pragmatism 
versus principle. After a long pause and a short, uneasy laugh, she says: 
"Fundamentally, everybody wants change, and I'm not going to sit here and judge 
other people's efforts. I do think we need a broad range of approaches to these 
issues."

I think she's avoiding saying anything that could be misconstrued as a 
feminist slagging match. "No, not at all. In my book I wrote that I'm seriously 
troubled by Dove. I think it just shows you the lack of work that's going on to 
tackle this. It's been completely sidelined as an issue; we don't hear many 
politicians battling it out on who's going to best tackle the harmful cultures 
which make young girls feel like they're objects. "I went to a recent event to 
celebrate efforts to promote better body image, a series of awards, and who got 
up but businessman after businessman after businessman. For me that's not what 
a feminist revolution looks like."

Another perennial feminist dilemma is the tension between personal choice and 
duty to principle. Every woman who gets breast implants can't help but 
reinforce the message that it's perfectly normal and sensible to spend 
thousands of pounds being cut open and stuffed with fake breasts. I ask if she 
thinks feminists who do so are letting other women down.

"It doesn't work like that," she says very firmly. "Not at all. The whole 
point is that feminism is about tackling the cultures that led women to feel 
like they didn't look good enough in the first place. I don't believe anyone 
has the right to judge another woman for the choices she makes in a highly 
sexist culture.Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> have to 
find ways to survive and get by each day, and how we do that will depend upon 
our circumstances. I think judging other women on that basis is the antithesis 
of what feminism is about. And we need to have our sights set on the structures 
and the industries which feed this culture, who are the ones driving it and 
reaping the profits from it."

I don't think I've ever met a high-profile activist so lacking in any 
discernible trace of ego. I've certainly never seen an interviewee approach the 
photoshoot with greater dread. The modesty makes her a somewhat guarded 
interviewee – she doesn't like to talk about her private or family life at all 
– but her achievements are all the more remarkable for it. UK Feminista is 
galvanising feminist campaigns across the country, training more new recruits 
in the art of activism.

One critic who reviewed her book 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2010/feb/21/the-equality-illusion-kat-banyard> 
complained that Banyard just didn't sound angry enough to stand a chance of 
making much impact. I wondered if that had made her angry, but she just shrugs. 
"Yeah, the very notion of anger crops up again and again in feminist 
discussions; either you're too angry, or you're not angry enough. If you're 
angry, you're irrational; if you're not angry, you don't care enough." She 
pauses and smiles. "But I've always found feminism incredibly inspiring."

• This article was amended on 15 October 2012. The original said it was 35 
years since the Abortion Act was passed. It is 45 years since the act was 
passed in 1967.
