
Two Victorian gentlemen sit facing each other on a long seesaw. They are 
locked in their up-and-down motion, each with an arm raised in salutation, 
confrontation, or just to maintain balance. Both men have globes of the world 
in place of their heads, and their dandy suits are crafted in vibrant West 
African print fabrics. Behind them, a vast window overlooks the sea.

This scene is End Of Empire, a new kinetic sculpture commission by 
British-Nigerian artist Yinka Shonibare MBE, at the Turner Contemporary gallery 
in Margate. It is dreamlike and disturbing, and Shonibare explains that his 
inspiration stems from the colonial history of the first world war:


“The two men represent the opposing sides of the conflict; the 
Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Triple Alliance of France, the United Kingdom 
and Russia,” he says. “They move very slowly; there’s something a bit menacing 
about that – there’s a constant flow of imbalance and discord.”

Related: 14-18 NOW and the art of war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-art-of-1418-now/2016/may/27/14-18-now-and-the-art-of-war>

End Of Empire is one of the works co-commissioned by 14-18 NOW, a nationwide 
programme of arts events to mark the centenary of the first world war. It is a 
major new artwork that reflects on multicultural themes in the first world war, 
the fact that imperial forces were at battle, and how its world in flux has 
shaped what it means to be British today.

“The first world war was a sort of proxy war of the empires,” says Shonibare. 
“Britain was too small to fight on this scale, so it had to turn to the 
colonies. It’s said that the first shot was fired by an African man, in Togo 
[it was Alhaji Grunshi, of the Gold Coast Regiment, on 7 August, 1914]. India 
also played a huge part for the British forces.”

Shonibare’s exhibition includes an accompanying walk-through artwork, The 
British Library, which consists of 6,500 books bound in his signature colourful 
textiles. The book spines are individually titled for British household names 
who happen to have immigrant roots, from the Queen and Helen Mirren to Nigel 
Farage. Interactive digital displays describe their achievements, and the 
conflicts that originally brought their families to Britain.


Both pieces consider history alongside timely modern issues of war and 
immigration. Shonibare states that he is careful not to be “too literal or 
didactic” in his work, but adds: “This also raises the role that xenophobia 
might play in a debate like Brexit. It’s presenting people with a set of ideas 
in a poetic manner, which is essentially what artists do.”

Throughout 14-18 NOW’s programme, connections are presented to audiences of 
all generations, who might not usually relate to the first world war, or its 
links to their own family heritage.


“There are global aspects here; more and more countries were getting involved 
in first world war, mainly because they were part of the British Empire,” says 
14-18 NOW director Jenny Waldman. “Incredible Journeys, our storytelling 
project for young people, reflects on how the war played out in many parts of 
the world. We also have a focus on the Hindu, Sikh and Muslim soldiers who 
fought in the first world war.”

An estimated 1.5 million soldiers from pre-partition India fought for the 
Allied side, including 400,000 Muslims. As part of 14-18 NOW, renowned 
Lahore-based artist Imran Qureshi will create Garden Within A Garden: new works 
in the public spaces of Bradford City Park, and the Mughal Water Gardens in 
Lister Park. “As an artist from Pakistan, Imran immediately had reference to 
first world war history in his country,” says Waldman.

Another 14-18 NOW project, Dr Blighty, is presented by artistic director Ajay 
Chhabra’s Nutkhut as part of Brighton Festival, and reveals a surprising 
history at Brighton’s Royal Pavilion. Between 1914 and 1916, the estate of this 
Indo-Gothic-styled landmark was used as a hospital for Indian servicemen 
recovering from injury on the Western front. Dr Blighty’s immersive 
installation evokes their experience, including performance, 3D video 
projections,music and readings of the soldiers’ letters home, and it captures a 
wider view of WW1: of untold stories and unsung heroes.

End Of Empire is at Turner Contemporary Margate, until 30 October; Dr Blighty 
is at Brighton Pavilion, until 29 May; Garden Within A Garden is at Mughal 
Water Gardens, Lister Park Bradford, June to September. For more details, see
1418now.org.uk <https://www.1418now.org.uk/> 
