
Last week I cooked with my almost mother in law. She showed me how to make 
something calledfalso magro, which translates as “false lean” – a stout roll of 
beef stuffed with a hard-boiled egg, prosciutto and vegetables that is then 
simmered in tomato sauce. I watched, poised to help, but mostly apologised for 
the inadequacies of my kitchen; no metal tongs, a blunt knife, no kitchen roll, 
no meat basher, the handle on my pan in the wrong position, my salt too coarse, 
my pepper grinder too tight. Realising my hovering was as annoying as my 
grinder, I sat at the table and made notes. I noted the recipe of course, even 
though much of it was in “qb” –quanto basta – which means however much is 
enough, or “use your common sense!”

Much more interesting though, were the commentary and the idiosyncratic 
touches that Carmela and time had brought to the dish. There was very specific 
bashing out of the meat and snipping away of any muscles or fibres that might 
make it curl, and a lament about butchers today. There was also advice about 
the arrangement of the carrot and celery around the egg accompanied by another 
lament, this time about arthritic fingers. There were instructions on chopping 
shallots and the rinsing of the tomato jar along with a story about conserving 
tomatoes in Sicily, and the reel of cotton pulled from her handbag, unreeled 
into lengths (my job) that was then used to secure the beef roll. Finally there 
was the oregano,la morte sua, which means the death of the dish (in the best 
possible way – remember thevinegar last week 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/01/cauliflower-sauce-puttanesca-recipe-rachel-roddy>
). I didn’t have any oregano! A kitchen without oregano: how was that possible? 
It was the death of it all, in the worst possible way.

Watching somebody else cook and learning from them is nothing new. It is 
special to watch people prepare food, to see the way they have put their 
experience, memories, habits and resourcefulness into a dish. Even if it is 
something you know well, a traditional dish maybe with little innovation, you 
will always learn something new: a tip, a saying, if you are lucky a story. I 
have always enjoyed watching others cook, but being in Italy with so much to 
learn about another food culture means it has taken on a whole new 
significance. Advice for one thing is often useful for another, so when you are 
in the kitchen you are not alone: all the advice you have ever been given 
swirls around like steam; kitchen company if you like.

Having possibly whetted your appetite for beef rolls, I am going to disappoint 
it for now. I need to make it a few more times and perfect my cotton-tying 
before piping up here. Give me a month. Today’s recipe is a good and useful one 
though. It is also one of the first recipes I learned to make in Italy, with 
well-seasoned advice from neighbours and friends. I say recipe: it is more of a 
technique that isn’t technical – lentils braised with chopped vegetables and 
olive oil. It is something I made all the time, and I have written about it 
before. Today’s version includes fennel, the sweetly aniseed flavour of which 
works well with the slightly dull, earthy taste of lentils, and the rich, meaty 
sausage.

The recipe starts with a little patience and sorting. I can see my neighbour 
Emilia hands going over the lentils, keen to spot a stone or a grain of wheat. 
I can hear her telling me lentils are good luck, and that maybe I should clean 
my windows. For the most part lentils don’t need soaking, which makes them a 
brilliant kitchen standby for someone like me who lacks soaking foresight. 
After sorting, the soffritto. This begins with extra virgin olive oil – the 
fundamental underlying flavour – then chopped vegetables; in this case onion, 
celery and fennel. If you don’t like fennel you can add carrot. More patience 
is required as you let the vegetables soften and deepen in flavour slowly – 
think of it as laying foundations. The amount of water you will need varies:
quanto basta; however much is enough. Start with 800ml. It will be absorbed as 
the lentils swell, and you may need to add a little more. By the end of cooking 
time, there should be just a little liquid, and lentils should be tender and 
soft, but not squidgy – they should have lentil integrity; taste and taste 
again. Salt and pepper are key to the flavour of lentils: be bold. I pan-fry my 
sausages then finish them in the oven. Metal tongs are useful here (if you have 
them!) Some final advice, which I can hear a friend saying across the stove: 
make sure you let the sausages sit among the lentils for a while, so theyfanno 
amicizia (make friends with each other), before serving.

Lentils with fennel and sausages

Serves 4
250g small brown Italian lentils (look out for castellucio)
1 bulb of fennel
A small onion
A stick of celery
5 tbsp extra virgin olive oil, plus extra
Salt
2 bay leaves
Chopped parsley (optional)
4 large sausages (or eight smaller ones)

1 Pick over the lentils for stones or grit, then rinse them. Remove the outer 
layer of fennel if it is very thick or damaged and save for stock. Trim just a 
little from the base as you want the bulb to hold together. Then cut away the 
fingers (saving any fronds for salad). Peel and finely dice the onion along 
with the celery and fennel fingers. Cut the fennel bulb in half, and then 
quarters and each quarter into 5mm wedges.

2 Warm the olive oil in a deep frying pan or casserole, add the chopped onion, 
celery and fennel along with a pinch of salt and cook gently until soft. Then 
add the fennel wedges and bay leaves and stir until everything glistens with 
oil.

3 Now add the lentils and stir again. Add 800ml of cold water, bring to a 
gentle boil, then reduce to a simmer until the lentils are tender (but still 
holding their shape) with just a little liquid – this will take 20–40 minutes 
depending on the age and variety of lentils. Season with salt and black pepper, 
olive oil and some chopped parsley if you wish.

4 Meanwhile grill or pan-fry the sausages. In the last minutes of lentil 
cooking time, add the sausages and a little of their fat and juices. Stir and 
serve.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award
