
Roy Greenslade is wrong to say I deliberately “withheld” from the Press 
Complaints Commission and the Leveson inquiry “vital information” about how 
some Mail on Sunday journalists’ phones were hacked by the News of the World (
Report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/aug/01/mail-pcc-leveson-news-world-hacked-staff>
, 2 August). We were contacted by police in October 2006 and told some of our 
journalists’ phones had been hacked. The police recommended our journalists 
improve their phone security, but did not want them to make statements, nor 
suggest the hacking had involved anyone other than Goodman and Mulcaire.

In fact they said the hacking had ended at the time of Goodman and Mulcaire’s 
arrests, which strongly suggested they were responsible. We were satisfied the 
police were dealing with the issue, which was of course sub judice. It was 
already known that Mulcaire had hacked the phones of people other than the 
Royal household – he admitted five further offences at his trial in November 
2006. It was hardly surprising he should have hacked phones of staff on a rival 
newspaper. I joined the PCC in May 2008. Had it occurred to me, when the PCC 
was discussing the fresh allegations made by the Guardian in July 2009, that 
the hacking of our journalists’ phones was anything other than a minor part of 
the series of offences for which Goodman and Mulcaire had already been 
convicted, I would happily have shared it with other commissioners.

I have never made any secret of it, nor had any reason to – after all, our 
journalists were victims of these crimes just as much as anyone else. Indeed it 
was common knowledge in the industry thatMail on Sunday 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> phones had been hacked. As far 
as Leveson is concerned, it was widely reported in the Guardian and elsewhere 
in summer 2011 that the police had contacted our journalists again and asked 
for statements – so much for Greenslade’s claim the hacking “remained a secret 
for eight years”. Had Leveson chosen to ask me about it when I gave evidence in 
January 2012 I would readily have answered any questions.
Peter Wright
Editor emeritus, Associated Newspapers
