
Downing Street has agreed to a partial climbdown on reforms of trade unions 
amid warnings that the EU remain campaign needs to keep their members on side 
for the 23 June referendum.

After a protracted battle over the trade union bill, the government proposed 
delaying changes to political funding and agreed to a trial of e-voting for 
strike ballots.

Ministers will still force trade unionists to opt into their organisation’s 
political fund, rather than subscribing automatically, in a move that Labour 
has warned could cost the partyup to £8m a year 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/04/labour-predicts-trade-union-bill-cut-funding-8m>
.

However, amendments tabled by the government on Tuesday afternoon would mean 
the changes now come into force after a longer transitional period of 12 months 
rather than three.

Ministers also agreed to pilot e-voting for strike ballots – a change 
suggested by the House of Lords.

It comes after a previous climbdown over plans to make all civil servants and 
staff in the wider public sector who belong to a unionswitch to direct debits 
or make other arrangements to pay their fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/06/public-sector-workers-stopped-automatically-union-subscriptions-pay-cheques>
, rather than having them deducted from their salaries.

The government tabled the changes before the trade union bill returns to the 
House of Commons on Wednesday and its likely return to the House of Lords next 
week.

David Cameron’s official spokeswoman left open the possibility that there 
could be further changes in the coming days, saying the bill was “going through 
parliament; it is not yet on the statute book”.

Asked if there was truth in the suggestion that No 10 was worried about 
alienating trade unionists before theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> vote, she said: “What is 
driving our approach is making a step change forward in balancing the interest 
of the unions against the majority of people who rely on the services they 
provide.”

Trade unions have bitterly resisted the reforms, branding them ideological and 
anassault on fundamental human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/10/trade-union-bill-undermine-human-right-protest>
.

Before the concessions were unveiled, Frances O’Grady, the general secretary 
of theTUC <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/tuc>, said she had resented 
having to fight the battle against the trade union bill at a time when she 
could be working to convince left-leaning voters that Britain should remain in 
the EU.

“In a practical way, I have been going up and down the country banging on 
about the trade union bill, when I would much rather be spending at least some 
of my time going up and down the country banging on about why a Brexit would be 
a big gamble on workers’ rights and jobs,” she said.

”I think maybe the penny is starting to drop that in terms of grassroots 
organising capacity; in terms of having 200,000 workplace representatives who 
are often opinion leaders in the community, too, that it doesn’t make sense to 
be hammering us at a time when most people have no idea of why they’ve picked 
on us in the first place.”

The unions and Labour have not yet responded to whether the concessions go far 
enough, but Katie Ghose, chief executive of the Electoral Reform Society, said 
they were much-needed changes.

“The decision to give unions a year to transition towards making members opt 
in to their political funds is a positive step,” she said. “This 12-month 
period is a real window of opportunity for all parties to get around the table 
and sort out our broken party finance system once and for all.

“The public are sick and tired of party funding scandals, so the government 
and opposition should use this time to thrash out a genuine cross-party deal. A 
year is a long time in politics; it shouldn’t be beyond the parties to agree on 
a fair and transparent funding system in that time.”
