
St John Bread & Wine, Spitalfields

On the face of it, let alone in a "budget eats" feature, £5.70 seems an awful 
lot to pay for a bacon butty. It is one of the themes of this series, however, 
that – particularly when you're eating on a tight budget – value is more 
important than cost. And theSt John 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2003/jul/19/foodanddrink.shopping1?INTCMP=SRCH>
 bacon butty is indisputably worth every one of those 570 pennies. It comprises 
two large chargrilled slices of proper artisan bread from the on-site bakery, 
thickly buttered and liberally stuffed withGloucester Old Spot bacon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2010/jun/21/gloucester-old-spot-protected-status>
. The rashers have a good three-quarter-inch rim of gloriously silky 
translucent fat around their outer edge. In its generosity, its use of supreme 
ingredients, in its hilarious disregard for anything you might describe as 
healthy eating, it isFergus Henderson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/fergus-henderson> (owner of this and 
the more famous parent restaurant, St John) on a plate. There are also kippers, 
pikelets or, if you really insist, porridge and prunes available for breakfast, 
but that bacon butty will set you up for the day like nothing else. From 11am, 
Bread & Wine – a pleasingly spartan former bank – serves elevenses, cakes and 
whatnot. Then, from lunch onwards the menu consists of small 'n' large plates 
(£4-£15), which people mix 'n' match, splashing the cash. That said, if you can 
squeeze in for a simple bowl of celeriac and bacon soup, do (£5.90).
• Breakfast £2.60-£5.70, elevenses cakes £2.90. 94-96 Commercial Street, E1 
(+44 (0)20-3301 8069,stjohnbreadandwine.com <http://www.stjohnbreadandwine.com/>
)

Beigel Bake, Brick Lane
 Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
The tile work at this Brick Lane bakery has seen better days, but then you 
might look a bit tired yourself had you been serving fresh breads, pastries and 
filled bagels to hungry Londoners, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week since the late 
1970s. Beigel Bake is a legendary stop-off for late-night revellers, but you 
will find queues of varying lengths here whatever time of day you drop by. In a 
place where filled bagels start at 90p, spending £3.50 on one may seem rash. 
But the warm salt beef bagel is worth it. Tasty, moist, gelatinous thick-cut 
braised brisket on a fantastic dense, chewy bagel, served with peppy mustard, 
it is simple but satisfying stuff.
Filled bagels from 90p. 159 Brick Lane, E1 (+44 (0)20-7729 0616)

The Gun, Docklands
 The Gun London 
There is not a lot of individuality or joy in Canary Wharf. People are too 
busy making money. Escape its soaring glass and steel boulevards, however, and, 
a short walk away, you will find Tom and Ed Martin's polished gastropub, the 
Gun. An oasis of laughter, clubbable informality and good food, it is also a 
fine place in which to consider the mad folly of the Millennium Dome, visible 
across the Thames from the pub's waterside terrace. There is a proper 
restaurant section at the Gun, but the budget traveller should grab a table in 
the back – by the toasty open fire – and give the bar menu the once-over. 
There, you will find the likes of homemade fish finger sandwiches, a 
cheeseboard, devilled whitebait or a half a pint of prawns at under £10 a head. 
A sausage roll (£4.50) is a substantial slab, more lunch than a snack. A hunk 
of soundly sage-seasoned, smoothly ground, juicy sausage-meat in a perfectly 
bronzed, buttery thin pastry, it is seriously good stuff. It's like the best 
Christmas Day stuffing ... ever. A sample pint of Fuller's London Pride (£3.50) 
is as lively as it can be, which is not very. It is a definitive boring brown 
bitter.
• Bar menu available for lunch and dinner, from £4.50. 27 Coldharbour, E14 
(+44 (0)20-7515 5222,thegundocklands.com <http://thegundocklands.com/>) 

Frizzante, Hackney and Rotherhithe

 Frizzante, London 
This cafe at Hackney City Farm <http://www.hackneycityfarm.co.uk/> is a 
refreshingly rough 'n' ready, slightly ramshackle place. But for the steady 
stream of young mums and toddlers coming through the door, you might mistake it 
for some arty, hipster hang-out. Which, this being Hackney, it kind of is as 
well. There is a small deli section and ice-cream counter, but it is worth 
settling in and sampling Italian chef Eddy Ambrosi's blackboard specials, such 
as pappardelle pasta with a slow-cooked pork ragu, pressed organic brawn 
terrine or a wild British mushroom risotto. Much of the produce comes from 
farms in Kent and Essex, and, depending on seasonal availability, Frizzante's 
own veg patch. A portion of lightly cured salmon and scrambled eggs, topped 
with a particularly zingy creme fraiche and chives, is huge (£6.50). Bright 
swirls of orangey yolk suggest good eggs, although personally I think they 
could have been creamier. There is a fine line between scrambled eggs and 
omelette.
• Food served until 4pm. Breakfast £4-£7. Daily specials from £5. Hackney City 
Farm, 1a Goldsmiths Row, E2 (+44 (0)20-7739 2266,frizzanteltd.co.uk 
<http://www.frizzanteltd.co.uk/>). Second branch at Surrey Docks Farm 
<http://www.surreydocksfarm.org.uk/>, Rotherhithe, SE16, open Wednesday to 
Sunday

Hackney Pearl, Hackney Wick

 Hackney Pearl, London 
From breakfast to late-night cocktails, this trendy cafe-bar is, laudably, 
trying to do lots of important things well. Food-wise the emphasis is on 
labour-intensive, from-scratch making and baking, running the gamut from bar 
snacks, like the Pearl's little pots of homemade pork scratchings (90p), to 
fantastic, fragrant apple, cinnamon and clove muffins (£1.80). A bowl of 
parsnip soup is warm, wholesome, properly seasoned and vibrantly fresh in 
flavour, and arrives with good bread. That day's chalkboard menu includes 
appealing dishes such as lamb and caper hash with fried egg (£8.20). Breakfast 
includes the kitchen's own granola, sweetcorn fritters with chilli jam, and 
bubble 'n' squeak. A sample coffee was disappointing – buying Square Mile 
coffee is one thing, treating it with the respect it deserves is another. Note: 
the evening menu is more expensive, with most main dishes topping £10.
• Breakfast £3.50-£7.50, soups/sandwiches around £4.50, daytime mains £7-£9. 
11 Prince Edward Road, E9 (+44 (0)20-8510 3605,thehackneypearl.com 
<http://thehackneypearl.com/>) 

Tayyabs, Whitechapel
 Tayyabs 
An utterly predictable choice, perhaps, but there is a reason why everyone 
raves aboutTayyabs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2005/may/08/foodanddrink.shopping?INTCMP=SRCH>
. This Pakistani grill and curry house is very, very good. How can you not love 
a restaurant where, on a sunny Tuesday lunchtime, the staff have to throw open 
the doors in order to let out a sudden build-up of aromatic smoke from those 
famous tandoor ovens? Tayyabs' long-marinated grilled lamb chops (four for £6) 
remain one of life's great savoury pleasures, the meat essentially a delivery 
vehicle for a complex hit of sweet 'n' smoky, hot 'n' spicy flavour, edged with 
a crisp, blackened strip of fat. Don't be surprised to find yourself gnawing 
the bone long after the meat has gone. There is no standing on ceremony at 
Tayyabs and eating in here can be a pretty quick turnaround experience. On busy 
weekend evenings particularly, you are not encouraged to linger at your table. 
But at these prices (curry and rice around £7-£8) this is exceptional food: 
conscientiously cooked, sparkily spiced and lifted by liberal use of fresh 
herbs. Seeing it in daylight for once, Tayyabs is quite a smart space these 
days, too.
• Starters from 95p, mains from £5.20. No alcohol sold, BYO no corkage. 83-89 
Fieldgate Street, E1 (+44 (0)20-7247 6400,tayyabs.co.uk 
<http://www.tayyabs.co.uk/>)

Cay Tre, Hoxton
 Cay Tre, London 
Such is the cluster of Vietnamese restaurants around the Kingsland Road/Old 
Street junction, they probably deserve a feature in their own right. Cay Tre is 
a good place to start your exploration. With its fashionable black 'n' white 
wallpaper and multicoloured lighting, the space itself is very modern 
Shoreditch, but in terms of its accumulated knowledge and skill, the cooking 
harks back generations. You could spend a long time trying to discern exactly 
what has gone into the clear, light broth that makes Cay Tre'spho (Vietnamese 
noodle soup) stand out. Packed with fresh coriander, spring onions and, in my 
case, beef, it is neither as salty nor as hot as you might imagine, but instead 
reveals new ingredients (star anise, garlic, roasted onions, cinnamon, some 
sort of base meaty, umami flavour) with each mouthful. It is a delicate clean 
soup with a nonetheless serious depth of flavour. The accompanying noodles are 
great, too. As a takeaway, this "small" pot of goodness is enough for a solid 
lunch or light dinner and costs just £3.50, which makes it all the more 
remarkable. Eating in at Cay Tre, the pho dishes are affordable throughout 
(around £7), but, at night, a main meat or fish dish plus rice might nudge £10. 
If you need to stick rigidly to a budget, then at lunch and before 6pm, the 
menu offers various "one-dish meals", such as lemongrass-marinated barbecue 
pork with bun (cold vermicelli noodles) or mixed seafood with jasmine rice, at 
£6.50-£8.
• Takeaway dishes £3-£8, starter/main deal £9.50. 301 Old Street, EC1 (+44 
(0)20-7729 8662,vietnamesekitchen.co.uk <http://www.vietnamesekitchen.co.uk/>)

Pavilion Cafe, Victoria Park
 Photograph: Alamy 
Victoria Park is currently in the midst of major renovation work, which means 
this lakeside cafe is currently lacking its lake (it's been drained) and its 
usually picturesque views (unless you love mud and industrial diggers). But 
still, on a dull Wednesday morning it is packed, such is the quality of the 
food. Superior, seasonal ingredients are confidently handled in everything from 
sandwiches to a beef shin stew with turnips, sprouts and rye bread. The 
Pavilion will prick the interest of vegetarians, too, with unusually thoughtful 
dishes like sprouting broccoli, crushed artichokes and soft boiled egg on 
toast, with a hazelnut dressing. A plate of eggs Benedict easily passes muster, 
although it has been left to linger on the pass. It is lukewarm rather than 
hot. It is also worth noting that the Pavilion gets very busy with mums, giddy 
toddlers and buggies. Anti-social singletons who want to eat at its communal 
tables in peace may want to take a paper (the Guardian, of course) and an iPod.
• Breakfast £2.50-£8.50, sandwiches £4, hot dishes £5-£8. Takeaway available. 
Victoria Park, corner of Old Ford Road and Grove Road, E9 (+44 (0)20-8980 0030,
the-pavilion-cafe.com <http://www.the-pavilion-cafe.com/>)

Albion at the Boundary, Shoreditch
 Albion, London 
If confirmation were needed that Shoreditch has lost its edge, the arrival of 
Terence Conran's boutique hotel and restaurant, theBoundary 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2009/jul/26/boundary-hotel-shoreditch-london?INTCMP=SRCH>
, is surely it. Its gentrification is now almost complete. Still, on the 
upside, the site's newer ground-floor deli-cafe, Albion, is a great place to 
eat. And we can always do with more of those. Look beyond the shelves of HP 
Sauce and Yorkshire Tea (we get it, the Albion is a celebration of Englishness) 
and you will find some good, and good value, food here. You can eat in the 
"caff" – a big Conranesque canteen space – for under £10 a head if you're 
careful, but with so many good things to take away from the deli section, why 
bother? There are made-to-order sandwiches, savoury pies and tarts, biscuits 
and cakes, and chilled drinks of a Meantime Brewery/Fentiman's quality. A 
sample pork and chutney pie in thick, glossy pastry is superb. A slice of 
Bakewell tart is, whilst an expert bit of baking, possibly a bit too refined 
for its own good. The jam is spread a little too thinly along the base and, 
consequently, the almond filling lacks the requisite sweet fruity tang. But 
still, overall, well worth a visit.
• Cakes and biscuits from 55p, snacks/sandwiches £2.50-£5. 2-4 Boundary 
Street, E2 (+44 (0)20-7729 1051,albioncaff.co.uk <http://www.albioncaff.co.uk/>)

Mangal Ocakbasi, Dalston

 Mangal, London 
There are no end of places on Stoke Newington Road cooking kebabs on 
traditional Turkishocak grills. Opinions vary, of course, as to which ocakbasi 
restaurant is the best, but Mangal – a 1993 entrant in the Good Food Guide and 
still listed in the 2011 edition – has a proven track record of producing 
superlative meats over many years. The restaurant proper is a little expensive 
for this piece (main dishes from £9), but, out front, takeaway customers can 
choose from 13 types of kebab (marinated lamb, chicken wings, lamb chops, 
quail, etc), which the grill chef then moves up and down a great trough of hot 
charcoal with patient authority. It is worth getting a takeaway just to watch 
him at work. Boldly seasoned with chilli, garlic and parsley, the minced lamb
beyti kebabs are sensational, an explosive combination of heat, carbon and hot 
lamb juices. Moreover, you get two eight-inch kebabs, a small, discus-like loaf 
and a great mixed salad (it includes everything from gherkins to pickled 
radish) for £6. It could easily be split between two for lunch.
• Takeaway kebabs from £5.10. Arcola Street, off Stoke Newington Road, E8 (+44 
(0)20-7275 8981,mangal1.com <http://www.mangal1.com/index.htm>) 

Tony travelled from Manchester to London with Virgin Trains 
<http://www.virgintrains.co.uk/> 
