
Don’t admit your fears 


Your beloved adult child is about to embark on a lifelong commitment about 
which they understand nothing. So it’s not surprising you’re as alarmed for 
them as you would be if they were sailing theNorthwest Passage 
<http://www.britannica.com/place/Northwest-Passage-trade-route> in flip-flops. 
Whichever phrase of warning or concern springs to your lips, however, hold it 
in. Your child needs support, not dread.

So if you can’t pretend you’re thrilled, find something supportive to say. It 
will be appreciated.

Don’t project 


Perhaps you had a nightmarish birth, featuring forceps, hallucinations and 
seven junior doctors loitering like women of the bedchamber. Maybe your baby 
was a shocking sleeper, or refused to eat anything but peas for the first three 
years. None of this, however, means that your children will have the same 
experience of parenthood. So while empathy and practical support are useful, 
constantly referring back to your own parental traumas is not.

Equally, you may have deep-seated fears about certain issues but be aware that 
these areyour issues. Projecting your own terrors is unhelpful at best and 
damaging at worst. The parents will have enough fears of their own, and your 
job is to calmly reassure.

Avoid jealousy

“I really don’t understand why she buys our grandson those terrible clothes …” 
If you’re not careful, your brewing jealousy of the Other Grandma could turn 
you into a superannuated Mrs de Winter in Rebecca, constantly haunted by your 
counterpart, living with the building paranoia that she’s somehow better, more 
loved, and more of a gran than you’ll ever be.

This is often the case when you’re the paternal grandmother because, on the 
whole, women are better at involving their mums, while plenty of men think a 
bi-monthly text is the pinnacle of communication. And it can be horribly 
frustrating when the Other Gran is popping round every 10 minutes, while you’re 
still navigating a demanding career and live 200 miles away.

But nobody wants to be juggling a new baby and your easily bruised feelings, 
so barbed remarks about the tastes or childcare practices of the Other Gran are 
unacceptable. It’s not a competition – it’s a family. Albeit there’s often a 
fine line.

Only offer what you can give

The general assumption is that grandparents are selfless. But even if you’re 
retired, you’re used to owning your time and offering flexible childcare can 
fast become a very long piece of string indeed. So it’s vital to consider how 
much time you can offer – and make the arrangement as formal as possible. 
Nobody wants to be sitting round the table with a lawyer; equally, you don’t 
want your loving offer of two afternoons a week turning into three days, two 
evenings and a Saturday morning, unless you’re willing.

Be realistic about how much time you have, your levels of tiredness and 
confidence when it comes to baby-wrangling. It’s easier for everyone when you 
all know where you stand.

Brush up on your skills

While you may have been able to change a nappy with one hand and puree a 
cauliflower with the other 30 years ago, it’s likely that you have forgotten 
more than you ever knew.

Although some of it will return, there are some areas where times have 
changed. What babies can eat, for example (fish, soya and dairy aren’t 
recommended for under ones.) Where they sleep – sharing the 
parental/grandparental bed is seriously out – and how pushchairs work. So don’t 
go in unprepared – do some research before the baby arrives. Then you can be 
the competent gran, a steady liner in a sea of wavering parental tugboats.

Be clear about cash

After sweets and bedtimes, perhaps the thorniest issue of grandmother-hood is 
money. Nobody wants to quote a babycare price to their nearest and dearest, but 
with almost half of families with children reliant on grandparents for at least 
part-time childcare, if you spend between three and six days a week at the 
coalface, is it reasonable to do it all gratis or should you be demanding some 
recompense for your labour? There’s no rule, though many grandparents find the 
whole idea of charging distasteful. Plus if you take a wage, you need to be a 
registered childminder and then it becomes complicated. Some avert the issue by 
accepting expenses, others just view their costs as part of the grandparental 
lot. What you must do is clarify your position at the outset.

Break the rules – a bit

As a child, one of the joys of staying with my grandparents was knowing that I 
could stay up to watch Terry and June, and that my grandma would bring me 
breakfast in bed. The danger comes when the spoiling isn’t just a little mild 
indulgence – you’re actively breaking clear rules set by the parents.

So if they have a “no sweets before meals” policy and you’re sneaking your 
grandchild contraband, you may need to ask yourself why. Do you think their 
rules are unfair or are they just different from yours? Maybe it’s simply that 
you can’t bear to refuse your delightful toddler granddaughter anything she 
asks for. But while 15 minutes tacked on to bedtime won’t hurt, undermining 
dietary rules or allowing her to watch forbidden TV, is straying into fighting 
talk. And as soon as she can speak she’ll say “me and granny have got a secret” 
and you’ll be bang to rights. Remember, a little rule breaking goes a long way.

Don’t spend a fortune

Spoiling, of course, is often just another word for spending. And as a new 
grandparent, watching your adult children struggle to afford the raft of baby 
equipment and clothes and toys required can trigger an itchy credit-card 
finger. Not only will this drain your resources, it may also make your children 
feel inadequate.

Few parents like to feel that they can’t manage so if you want to buy a gift, 
consult them first. When it comes to birthdays and Christmas, again, resist the 
temptation to deliver a pink pony gift-wrapped in a box. If the parents can’t 
afford much, it’s nothing but show-boating. Keep presents appropriate and 
affordable.

Manage long distance

There’s a good chance your son or daughter will be living a good few hours’ 
drive away, if not abroad. Luckily, it’s possible to have a happy ongoing 
relationship with far-away family nowadays, thanks to Skype and Facetime. 
Speaking to them in real time, even if it’s a casual chat while you wait for 
the bus, means you never have to feel far away. Supplementing this is Facebook, 
email, texting and if your grandchildren are older, Snapchat. So if you pride 
yourself on being a luddite, the arrival of grandchildren is a good time to 
wake up and smell the virtual coffee.

Accept that you have no control

The hardest thing about parenting is being responsible for everything. And the 
hardest thing about grandparenting is accepting that you’re not. You may hate 
the ironic Velvet Underground T-shirts your baby granddaughter is dressed in, 
or have severe moral objections to the amount of CBeebies she’s allowed to 
watch, but saying so is a fool’s errand. The only exceptions to this rule are 
if you truly believe your grandchild is in danger, or are privy to facts that 
the parents aren’t, regarding what is and isn’t safe to eat.

The cornerstone of being a good grandparent is respect – for your own time, 
for the parents’ wishes and, of course, for your grandchild. Before you speak, 
always ask yourself: Is this helpful to anyone? Unless the answer is a 
resounding yes; don’t say it. That way, you’ll never go wrong.

• Extracted from Help! I’m a Granny by Flic Everett  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/help-i-m-a-granny.html>(Michael O’Mara, £9.99)
