
Thank you to the first one, who taught me that friendship can survive the 
stupidity of teenagers at parties. Thank you to the second one, who cherished 
me, made me feel adult, sophisticated, safe and wanted – I am only sorry that 
you were the most boring man on earth. To the first man who ever stayed at my 
parents with me – I owe you a debt of gratitude for teaching me that men are 
vulnerable too.

To the man I met in Byron Bay. Thank you for teaching me to say no. I didn’t 
at the time, but after you I knew myself the better for it. To the man I met on 
a night out who asked me to marry him and stay; who, when I said no, laughed 
and showed me how to feed the bull sharks bacon sandwiches from his balcony.

I will always remember you, the American I met on an island beach. You made me 
feel like I was the only person in the room, sexy and desirable. I have had a 
little more spring in my step since I met you.

To the man I met in Airlie Beach who used to stand smeared in honey and 
birdseed to feed the rainbow lorikeets. I am sorry that we are no longer 
friends. I had stopped valuing myself so much by the time I met you and I was 
too broken to keep you. 

To the men who made me feel like I had to act a certain way to gain their 
attention, to flaunt myself like a peacock so that you would still look at me. 
I am very glad that I met you because I can recognise who I never want to 
be again and how much I really have to give.

I have slept with a lot of men, enough that I no longer watch Four Weddings 
and a Funeral – with that scene in which Andie MacDowell and Hugh Grant talk 
about how many people she has slept with – and wince.

This letter really, though, is to the two most important men I have met. To 
the man I bought my house with; the man who wanted to marry me, whisked me off 
around the world – the man who left me. Left me the day the solicitor gave us 
our keys because you weren’t ready to leave home. The man who couldn’t bear to 
live apart from his mother. 

Thank you. Without you I wouldn’t know what I can stand or how strong I am. 
Without you I would never have been able to imagine how incredible my family 
can be or how much they love me and I them. Without you I would not be me.

Finally, to the man I love. The man who taught me what it is to be loved, to 
give and take and to build a life together. You are the best person who has 
ever happened to me.

To all the other men I have ever slept with – for teaching me how to love 
myself, to love other people, to value and feel valued, to pick myself up and 
dust myself off and to do the same to others ...

Thank you. Without you I would not have him.

Anonymous
