
Diver’s Dream
Just over two miles out from Crown Point at Drew Shoals, this advanced 20m 
dive in strong currents offers rich rewards for experienced divers. As well as 
nurse and reef sharks, the site is frequented by queen angelfish, blueheaded 
wrasse and barracuda, but its highlight is the series of huge barrel sponges, 
sculpted by the currents into irregular shapes.

Flying Reef
A short boat ride from the Crown Point beaches, the varying currents here 
determine whether you’ll get an exhilarating drift dive or a more gentle 
experience, with a maximum depth of 14m. Look out for schools of bigeye and 
glasseye snapper, parrotfish and French angelfish as well as stingrays, nurse 
sharks and turtles – and a 200-year-old barnacle-encrusted anchor.

Related: Tobago's best beaches - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-tobago/gallery/2016/may/26/tobagos-best-beaches-in-pictures>

Cove
An advanced-level site, offshore from Crown Point, with depths of up to 26m 
and currents flying along to the west, Cove offers some colourful and ornate 
reefs of fire coral, sea fans, sea rods and clumps of brain coral, all of which 
pull in the fish: you’re likely to see wrasse and parrotfish, grouper and 
snapper, while the crevices are home to lobster and moray eels.

Maverick wreck
Formerly a ferry named the Scarlet Ibis, the Maverick was cleaned up, renamed 
and sunk by the Tobago Dive Association in 1997. Twenty years on, its balconies 
and anchor chains support a rich growth of coral, while barracuda and bonito 
cruise around the hull on the hunt for smaller fish. A good introduction to 
wreck diving, the interior is easy to access, with a good growth of gorgonians 
and sponges.

Mount Irvine Wall
This relatively shallow dive, at 5–15m, is focused on the outcrop dividing 
Mount Irvine from Stonehaven Bay and offers a good chance to see seahorses and 
feather-duster and Christmas-tree worms; the deeper Mount Irvine Extension 
offers the prospect of spotted eagle rays, grouper and hawksbill turtles.

Sister’s Rocks
Offshore from the northeast Caribbean coast, this cluster of rocks some 1.5 
miles out to sea make a pretty sight as you drive along the coast road or 
through the Forest Reserve; below water, they offer some spectacular if 
challenging diving, and their distance from the shore means you may see large 
pelagic species, such as scalloped hammerhead sharks, manta rays and even 
whales.

London Bridge
Just off Tobago’s northeast tip, the reefs around St Giles Island can be 
subject to strong currents, and the London Bridge drift-dive is only for the 
advanced, with a maximum depth of 15m. But if conditions permit, you can 
explore the narrow underwater section of this magnificent rock arch, the top of 
which can be seen above water. The channel is frequented by trumpetfish, 
trunkfish and tangs, while the rock formations are dazzling, encrusted with 
coral and colourful sponges.

Japanese Gardens
At the northern corner of Tobago’s Atlantic coast, Speyside has the best 
diving in Tobago, with some 30 renowned sites in easy reach. Just offshore of 
the village, on the fringes of tiny Goat Island, the Japanese Garden is one of 
the area’s best sites. With depths of 3–18m, it’s great for all levels and, as 
the name suggests, boasts a rich covering of barrel, tube and vase sponges as 
well as the waving fronds of sea whips.

Kelleston Drain
Tobago’s reefs have many claims to fame, but the superlative applied to 
Speyside’s Kelleston Drain tops them all, as it’s home to what’s said to be the 
largest brain coral in the world, measuring in at some 3m high and just over 5m 
across. The reefs around it abound with swaying sea fans, sea whips and 
gorgonians; moray eels peer out from the crevices and barracuda cruise by. 
Maximum depth is 15m.

Bookends
South of the main Speyside sites, access to Bookends is at the whims of the 
currents, which are often too strong to dive safely here. Named for its two 
sizeable rocks poking out of the water, the site offers a breathtaking natural 
amphitheatre in which tarpon glide above a rich growth of coral, sea fans and 
sponges, with nurse sharks resting on the seabed, 25m below.

The better dive shops are affiliated with the Association of Tobago Dive 
Operators. Environmental Research Institute Charlotteville (ERIC) is a 
not-for-profit outfit that takes a conservation-based approach, sending marine 
biologists on each dive.tobagoscubadiving.com <http://tobagoscubadiving.com/>, 
eric-tobago.org <http://eric-tobago.org/index.html>


How to get there
British Airways flights to Tobago leave from London Gatwick twice a week and 
include a brief stop in Antigua. Once on board, sit back, relax and enjoy their 
complimentary food and drink service alongside the latest in-flight 
entertainment and start your holiday as soon as you step on board. For more 
information, clickhere 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/destinations/trinidad-and-tobago/holidays-in-tobago?ref_site=2016Q2Tobago>
