
Today’s recipe is very much inspired by acquacotta. It had been ages since I’d 
made this soup. For a while it was a regular, so I know the recipe well, but 
having been out of sorts in the kitchen lately, I sat down with a cup of tea 
and looked at the recipe before I got started. Not so much for the ingredients 
and quantities, which are pretty flexible, but to remind myself of the order of 
things, the details which make the difference: evenly sliced onion and celery, 
ideally with celery leaves too; bothering to peel the tomatoes; the long, slow 
cooking of the soffritto in lots of olive oil; adding hot water; the gentlest 
simmer for the eggs; garlic rubbed on the toast; bowls and slotted spoon at the 
ready. I had all the ingredients I needed, most importantly the bread – which 
was stale-going-on-hard.

Acquacotta is a traditional recipe from the Tuscan part of Maremma 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maremma>. The name means “cooked water”, and is 
best described as a simple vegetable soup served over bread, and possibly 
topped with an egg that has been poached in the soup. The dish has a long 
history, invented, perhaps, by those who worked away for significant periods – 
woodcutters and shepherds andbutteri, the cowboys who herded cattle on the 
vast, flat plains of Maremma. Carrying only oil, salt and increasingly stale 
bread, the workers would cook in water whatever wild greens, vegetables and
cardoons <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardoon> they might have found. They 
would then soften their bread back to life in this cooking water. If there were 
eggs, those too would be broken into the simmering pan.

Related: Classic Roman pasta and chickpea broth | Kitchen Sink Tales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/09/chickpea-pasta-soup-recipe-rachel-roddy>

Over time, acquacotta has become synonymous with Maremma, and it is served 
just about everywhere, intrattorie, restaurants and homes, often made according 
to recipes passed down through families. Time has created a new sort of 
necessity, that of protecting recipes people hold dear. That sometimes means 
straying is frowned upon, which seems so at odd with the variation, 
inventiveness and general anarchy that makes home cooking so wonderful. Strong 
opinion and advice, however, is another thing, and for me welcome. For some 
years now, we have been visiting a town in Maremma called Saturniain during 
early October. For a couple of days, we enjoy the hot springs that burst into 
an extraordinary cascade near an old mill (a beautiful and bonkers place), 
walks, and bowls of cooked water, white beans, pici pasta with garlic sauce and 
loads of red wine. I have eaten lots of what I understand is pretty classic 
acquacotta: onions, celery, tomatoes and basil, sometimes so thick with bread 
the spoon stands to attention, which can be quite hard work. I have enjoyed 
brothy bowlfuls scented with green herbs, others with cardoons, and one 
absolutely delicious version with potato, chicory and wild borage that embodied 
so much of what I love about Italian food: ingredients treated with a minimum 
of fuss to bring out the best in them, bold and clear flavours, and real 
resourcefulness.

So, to my version, which takes inspiration from all the bowls I have eaten. 
First up, bread, which should be at least a day old, or more. In Maremma, local 
unsalted bread is used, but a decent, compact country loaf works well. The 
foundation is lots of onion and celery, cooked slowly in plenty of extra virgin 
olive oil. Next, tomato: just enough to give the soup rosy cheeks. I always add 
potato, because I really like it, and also something green, ideally with a bit 
of bitterness. It is important to add salt as you go along – it brings out 
flavours: a small pinch with the onions, another when you add the potatoes, a 
final one at the end, along with black pepper.

Once all the ingredients are in the pan, the soup needs to simmer for about 45 
minutes, or until its flavour is mellow. It’s not a shouty soup. Make sure it 
is at a gentle simmer before breaking the eggs in – carefully – they should 
wobble ever so slightly while they put on their white coats, which takes 2-3 
minutes. Now, get the bowls ready. Some traditional recipes suggest sprinkling 
grated pecorino on the bread, but I prefer to swipe it with a cut clove of 
garlic (so it does shout). Ideally, the yolks of the eggs poached in the soup 
should be runny, which means you need to work quickly with a ladle and a 
slotted spoon, making sure everyone gets broth, enough vegetables, and an egg, 
possibly more broth, and then get the bowls and everyone to the table. As I 
said, this is my version, which works even when I am out of sorts. Use it as a 
template, adjusting according to what you have, and how you like your water 
cooked.

Vegetable soup with bread and eggs, inspired by acquacotta

Serves 4
80ml extra virgin olive oil 
2 onions (ideally one red, one yellow)
4 pale celery sticks, with pale leaves 
4 peeled plum tomatoes (fresh or tinned)
1 large potato
Salt and black pepper 
A tiny pinch of fried red chilli flakes (optional)
A big handful of mixed chopped greens: spinach, chard, borage, sorrel, 
dandelion, wild fennel or fennel fronds
4 slices of 2-day old bread (sourdough or a compact country bread) 
Pecorino or parmesan cheese, or a garlic clove, for the toasted bread 
4 eggs

1 Peel and very thinly slice the onions. Chop the celery into thin arcs (cut 
any particularly wide stems in two lengthways). Warm the olive oil in large 
heavy-based pan and add the onion, celery and a pinch of salt, then fry gently 
over a medium-low heat until soft and translucent.

2 Roughly chop the tomatoes and add to the pan. Peel and dice the potato and 
add that too, along with another pinch of salt, and the chilli, if you are 
using it. Cook for another few minutes.

3 Add 1.3 litres of hot water, lower the flame and leave the acquacotta to 
simmer for 45 minutes, adding the greens in the last 10 minutes. Taste and 
adjust the seasoning.

4 If the bread is very old and hard, it won’t need toasting. If it is just a 
day or two old, toast it. Prepare the bowls by putting a slice of old/toasted 
bread at the bottom of each and then rub with the cut side of a clove of 
garlic, or sprinkle it with a little grated cheese.

5 Making sure the acquacotta is simmering very gently, carefully break the 
eggs into the pan, then leave them to poach for 2-3 minutes. Using a ladle, put 
some broth and vegetables in each bowl, making sure everyone gets a bit of 
everything. Then use a slotted spoon to lift an egg on to each, before adding a 
bit more broth.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award



