
This week, we moved one step closer to having the first female US president 
after Hillary Clinton won the Democratic nomination. But if you think that’s 
the glass ceiling shattered, then think again.

The number of female senators in the US stands at 20%. Just 4.2% of Fortune 
500 companies have female CEOs. That sound you heardwasn’t glass breaking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/live/2016/jun/08/has-hillary-clintons-victory-finally-shattered-the-glass-ceiling-for-women-live>
 it was just the creak of a small crack slowly spreading. We already know that 
achieving gender pay parity is going to take another 70 years, so what can we 
do to speed the process up? For me, it starts with with supporting and 
elevating female entrepreneurs, because when women run their own companies they 
can make their own rules.

More and more women are running their own businesses; we no longer have to 
wait for men to make the changes
Uschi Schreiber, EY 
At the EY World Entrepreneur of the Year event this week, businesswoman and 
writer Margaret Heffernan spoke about the moment in her career when she 
realised she had been playing a game designed by, and for, men.

“I realised that all I’d learned [in my career] was to be tough,” she said. 
“Did I want my kids to think, ‘she was tough’? It didn’t seem like such a great 
idea anymore. ‘You’re an idiot’, I thought, ‘you played [a man’s] game and you 
should have played your own’. Then I realised, I didn’t have one.”

Women <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> starting their own 
businesses are able to set their own gameplan and start to dictate the future 
of work, not just for themselves but also for other women. Rather than waiting 
for women to get to the top of existing businesses, we should be encouraging 
them to set up their own and rewrite the rulebook. The effect of this would go 
beyond just their own lives.

“Women in leadership roles [whether that’s business, government or third 
sector] must take action in support of other women,” says Uschi Schreiber, 
global vice chair – markets at EY. “ As we see more female CEOs, let’s make 
sure they remember that they have a responsibility to create an environment 
that is supportive for other women too.”

Technology is enabling these entrepreneurs but it’s also potentially 
threatening the jobs of other women. While tech allows us to work from 
anywhere, at times that we dictate, it’s also being used to automate many 
routine, lower-paid jobs. Jobs such as check-out staff or admin roles, jobs 
that were traditionally filled by women.



Furthermore, it is predicted that 40% of the US workforce will be part of the 
gig economy (where people work on a freelance or ad hoc basis) by 2020. This 
type of working structure is particularly detrimental to women – it does enable 
them to take on smaller jobs that fit around their lives but also results in 
less pay and greater job insecurity.

“The collective impact [of technology] raises questions for us as a society, 
and as businesswomen,” says Schreiber. “[Female CEOs] must think about how they 
can help women, by hiring women, promoting them and supporting them. More and 
more women are running their own businesses; we no longer have to wait for men 
to make the changes.”

If Clinton does become president there will be extra scrutiny on how her 
policies affect women. We should also be applying that scrutiny to business. We 
should expect all business leaders, men and women, to think about how their 
actions affect their employees – particularly women. If female entrepreneurs 
did this, if they created successful, scaleable businesses that they’d want to 
work for, then we might change not just work, but society as well. We could 
rewrite the playbook and finally play our own game.
