
Walking through Mossbourne academy's long, high, glass atrium you have to 
speak in whispers, for every classroom door is left open to reveal rows of 
neatly uniformed children, heads-down in concentration. You could literally 
hear a pen drop.

Sir Michael Wilshaw, the Hackney-based academy's first principal and now 
England's new chief inspector of schools, believes every school could be like 
this.

"There's a 'no excuses culture' here," he says. "We tell the youngsters and we 
tell the parents we don't care really what background you're from; it's where 
you're going that's the most important issue."

Six miles away, on the Isle of Dogs, Kenny Frederick, principal of George 
Green's school, visibly bristles at Wilshaw's name. This week's league tables 
will show her school to be well behind Mossbourne on raw results – but they 
won't show what she's up against: the "contextual value-added" measure, which 
used to measure a school's performance against social factors such as the 
numbers of pupils on free school meals, has been dropped.

Sometimes, Frederick says, her staff have to pick the nits from their pupils' 
hair before they even try to teach them. She recently handed out dozens of 
alarm clocks to children who often need to leave for school before their 
unemployed parents have woken up. It's not about excuses, she says. When 
ministers visit Mossbourne they talk as if it's in a tough, tough area, but 
compared with the Isle of Dogs, Hackney's actually pretty well-heeled. A third 
of the pupils at Mossbourne take free school meals – twice the national average 
– but that's half the number at George Green's.

"We want the best for our youngsters, but there are excuses," Frederick says. 
"I have large numbers who would otherwise be in a special school – other 
schools won't take them, and I think that's morally wrong. I'm not going to 
refer to Mr Wilshaw's school, though I used to work in that area …" she 
hesitates, clearly holding back. "Some areas, the children could be left out on 
the lawn and they'd do equally well because the parents will bring in tutors 
and so on."

The new chief inspector of schools, who took up his post this month, certainly 
inspires strong emotions. The education secretary,Michael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, has described him as a 
"hero", and the shadow education secretary, Stephen Twigg, has declared himself 
equally happy with the appointment.

Wilshaw has not set out to endear himself to teachers. Even before officially 
taking up his Ofsted post, he made a speech in which he said that in future a 
"satisfactory" rating by inspectors should be viewed as unsatisfactory, and that
Ofsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> should look at whether 
heads were being too generous to failing teachers when allocating 
performance-related pay.

A good head would never be loved by his or her staff, he added: "If anyone 
says to you that 'staff morale is at an all-time low' you know you are doing 
something right."

The reaction from teachers has been predictable: one internet poster compared 
Wilshaw to a South American dictator. "The lunatics have taken over the 
asylum," remarked another.

Wilshaw's appointment certainly signals interesting times ahead for schools, 
in particular, because his record as a headteacher appears impressive. His 
first headship was at St Bonaventure's Roman Catholic school in Newham, which 
he transformed from a struggling school into an outstanding one. Mossbourne, 
too, has been held up as a shining example of excellence in an inner-city area.

Touring the academy, which opened in 2004, in a brand new building designed by 
Richard Rogers, Wilshaw carries himself with a gait that expresses ownership, 
that he's the embodiment of the school – focused, rigorous. Rules matter here.

"Little things like insistence on uniform, pupils standing up when the teacher 
walks into the room are all important in giving structure to children's lives," 
he says. "We have a very long teaching day for some children – if they are 
falling behind we keep them back at the end of the day so that they can improve 
their qualifications."

There's no disputing that the strategy has paid off in terms of exam results. 
Eight out of 10 gained five or more A*-C grades at GCSE including English and 
maths last year –well above average. This year, 10 have been offered places at 
Cambridge.

Yet suspicions abound – could Mossbourne be attracting brighter pupils than 
other local schools? Certainly the academy has a wide catchment area, so it is 
likely to gain applicants from motivated families – currently 60% of its pupils 
come from within a kilometre of the school and 40% from further away. Its 
proposed admissions policy for 2013 entry reveals plans to increase the number 
from outside its immediate area to 50%, and to test and "band" pupils so its 
entrants reflect the national average spread of abilities. In an area where 
pupils' test scores at age 11 are below that, this could give the school an 
advantage.

A visit to George Green's highlights just how difficult it would be to create 
a system in which every school was a Mossbourne academy. In a London docklands 
area that's been plagued by unemployment since the 1970s, George Green's feels 
peripheral. Its buildings have been waiting for a facelift for years, and 
although it's orderly, there's a look about its large quotient of white, 
working-class pupils – a greyness of skin, shadows under the eyes – that says 
they're not thriving. Frederick laughs when this is pointed out: "We joke about 
it when we go to sports matches in Hackney, because the boys there are so huge."

Despite having nearly twice as many pupils on free school meals as Mossbourne, 
George Green's GCSE results are close to the national average, with half 
gaining five A*-C grades including English and maths. And it, too, sometimes 
sends pupils to Oxbridge.

While Mossbourne may look like a school with a tough pupil population, five 
minutes in George Green's says it isn't. A small batallion of helpers in red 
jumpers nurtures and cajoles the pupils here.

"I feel very intimidated by this government, and I'm not a woman who's easily 
intimidated," she says. "I don't think they understand what we're up against, 
and I don't think they want to. I don't mind being challenged, all of us want 
to do really well, but I don't want to be hit over the head all the time. If 
all I had to worry about was raising levels of attainment I'd be laughing."

Conversations with leaders in the world of education about the new chief 
inspector of schools are revealing. A real sense of anger is mounting, yet most 
aren't quite ready to express it publicly yet.

Chris Keates, general secretary of the National Association of Schoolmasters 
Union of Women Teachers, couches her remarks in broad political terms – she's 
due to have her first official meeting with Wilshaw later this week. After all, 
she says, chief inspectors never have easy relations with the teaching 
profession, nor should they. But she adds that last week's announcement of an 
immediate inspection of Downhills, a Haringey primary school the government 
wants to force into academy status, leads to suspicion that Ofsted is now a 
political weapon.

"I think the domain we're moving into now is of Ofsted being viewed by nobody 
as independent from the secretary of state. It's now being seen by teachers not 
as an inspection system, but as an arm of government," she says.

"Many of the pronouncements coming out of Ofsted seem to be absolutely equal 
to things Michael Gove has said. I think it's bad for the chief inspector and I 
think it's bad for public accountability."

Yet Wilshaw is unrepentant – and it seems unlikely he'll be gathering garlands 
from teachers any time soon. The government was right to drop the "contextual 
value-added" measure, introduced by Labour five years ago, from this week's 
league tables, he says. Talk about social factors simply "entrenches 
mediocrity".

"If you take into account ethnicity, free school meals and a whole range of 
other indicators, it can give the impression that you're making excuses," he 
says.

"The essential truths are that a poor leader runs a poor school; a good leader 
runs a good school. A good teacher can make a difference in a classroom; a poor 
teacher makes little or no difference. I think we know what makes a good 
school. We just need to make sure it happens on the ground now."

• Fran Abrams will ask what difference schools really make to the lives of 
children from poor backgrounds on BBC Radio 4's Analysis at 8.30pm on Monday 30 
January
