
For Halloween I went as a man who cried. The most terrifying costume ever 
made, it caused children to scream and men to punch walls and women to vomit 
into the phones on which they were booking last-minute sterilisations.

A man, but crying. It’s hard to keep the two images in your head, I know. The 
two belong in different universes, one in the universe of wood logging and hard 
cash, the other in a universe of menstruation and chamomile, am I right? Of 
course I am. I know. I live in the real world, where a man is to tears what a 
bath is to a panini. They both have their place, but never thesame place.

When an Uber driver refused to take me to the party, I realised, sadly, that 
the performance I’d planned for later, a dramatic reading of last week’sEvening 
Standard 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/half-of-men-in-london-feel-like-crying-once-a-month-study-reveals-a3102921.html>
piece reporting that half the men in London feel like crying once a month, 
would be too dangerous, and was forced to duck into a Costa and change into a 
gentler costume. Of course it still had to be scary. So I wiped off the glass 
tear and went as “Sending a dick pic but accidentally replying all”.

But when are they crying, the Standard’s London men? And where? Perhaps that 
flight of stairs underneath Somerset House, the one that leads down to the 
river and is often slippery. Perhaps High Barnet. Men’s tears are so 
uncomfortable, even in this modern world where almost everything else is OK, 
that it’s almost impossible to believe that not only are they weeping so 
regularly but that they’ve admitted it.

The tears of a man are said to bring a curse to his village. In our case, the 
square mile around his nearest Little Waitrose. It is rumoured that the reason 
our tomato plants never bore fruit is that two summers ago my neighbour watched
Blue Valentine, alone. Why, Sean? Why couldn’t you hold it in? Why couldn’t you 
simply pretend everything is OK, all the time, and that no emotion is stronger 
than a pinch, like other men do so successfully? Why couldn’t you watch 
something sturdy and proud on Dave instead? What led you there, Sean, to the 
DVD your wife left on the side for after yoga? Before the tears came, and as 
they came, as your eyes became children, how did you feel? Was it good? Did you 
like it?

There are some men, of course, because there always are, some perverts that 
profess to enjoy weeping. A perfect Sunday, said one man to me anonymously, his 
face pixellated, would start with a good coffee in the park while the kids play 
on the swings, then back home to eggs and bacon, flick through the papers, then 
a gentle cry in the bath, thenMastermind. Another man, who hasn’t cried since 
he was 11, told me he worries that if he started crying – if he watched the 
wrong YouTube video, or saw the wrong sunset, standing on the wrong beach – he 
would never stop. Hence him carrying around a bottle of isotonic sports drink 
in case of surprise dehydration.

But that wouldn’t be the worst of it. The worst would be that he would no 
longer be taken seriously by his colleagues and peers, who would from that day 
on see him clouded in a viscous pinky haze, as if seen through a bottle of 
bubble bath. No more invitations to “the pub”. No more questions about his 
thoughts on the Grexit. He would become a man that cried, and all the terror 
and weakness that implied.

They should just block the ducts up with a drop of UHU, men. Wouldn’t it be 
easier for everybody in the long run? Easier that than trying to solve the 
brutality of masculinity, say, or socialise our sons to talk about emotions. 
Instead a simple cauterising of the male eye urethra, at birth or earlier, and 
life for everybody else would be so much simpler.

Never again would we have to suffer the affront of a human man with his face 
wet with anything other than whisky or sweat. Never again the slightly awkward 
moment where, having patted the crier’s shoulder, you feel a strange lump 
rising in your throat, the size and density of an Ikea meatball, and your eyes 
become blurry, and empathy happens in an inappropriate place – public. Save us 
from this indignity. Save us, lord, from the crying man.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
