
How not to drink in a restaurant

Rule number one: never, ever arrive drunk at a restaurant. It is very bad form 
to turn up in a state that suggests you might have to pay corkage. On yourself. 
At the Ivy last month, a squiffy customer parked himself at a table, ordered a 
bottle of Krug then shouted across the room, 'Oi! Where's my caviar?' He was 
out on the pavement in a blink, with the imprint of the manager's shoe clearly 
visible on the back of his jacket. This sort of thing just won't do. You've got 
to show a little respect, if not to yourself, at least to staff and other 
customers. At sister restaurant Le Caprice recently, two women who should have 
known better sailed in on a sea of cocktails. One tripped over an ice-bucket 
stand on her way to the loo and soaked a table of four; the other lost her 
credit card and said to the waiter, 'Where's my main course?' To which the 
reply was, 'You've just eaten it.' How, erm, appalling.

No, it is just not on. Not only is turning up drunk rude and inconsiderate, 
you also rob the restaurant of the opportunity to fill you up to your personal 
Plimsoll line with their wine list and drinks. For them, this is the fiscal 
object of the whole exercise. You have a duty as a customer to be fair, not 
fairly falling down as you crawl across the threshold, eating a bowl of pot 
pourri on the bar and later complaining that their crisps are damp. However, in 
the BBC2 reality show The Restaurant, I don't know if it was wise for Raymond 
Blanc to spill les haricots and tell his would-be restaurateurs that the 
quickest way to increase profits is to get the dummies sitting in the 
restaurant to drink more cocktails. I'll say!

Kingsley Amis once said that the most depressing words in the English language 
were, 'Shall we go straight in?' I take his point, but there are limits. How 
much time should one spend on pre-prandial palate cleansers? If you see the 
head chef roaring off into the darkness on a motorbike and the vague outline of 
a nice lady vacuuming around your feet, the chances are you have overdone it. 
Twenty minutes max and one glass of a non spirit-based aperitif is definitely 
the most civilised response to pre-meal liquid absorption, something Shirley 
MacLaine would have done well to heed when Jack Nicholson steered her towards 
the bar on their first date in Terms of Endearment. 'You need a lot of drinks,' 
he told her, as his eyebrows flew north like escaping crows.

Champagne is ideal for the job. A glass of fresh, crushed raspberries fizzed 
up with chilled prosecco, just like they serve at the River Café in summer, 
can't fail to jolly up the mood. That's exactly what you want. Something 
frivolous and pretty, but not too bright or strong - a Paris Hilton kind of 
drink, but one that won't land you in jail. For apart from the occasional 
Negroni, a cocktail that's almost as bitter as me, I rarely order spirits in a 
restaurant. It's just not right. It's not good for the palate, nor the roasted 
kidneys (I'm talking about my own). In Casino Royale, James Bond has another 
view. 'I never have more than one drink before dinner,' he says, 'but I do like 
that one to be large and very strong and very cold and very well-made.' What is 
that dude ordering? A fridge? Sometimes friends sharing a bottle of light wine, 
like the bourgogne aligoté traditionally used to make a kir, is a better, 
mellower and more European solution to the brashness of a Falcon Claw or, dear 
me, a Rebel Yell. However, be aware that if you do order kir, this is how less 
scrupulous restaurants get rid of their corked and leftover wines. But it's 
best not to obsess about that kind of stuff. Sometimes I'd like to fingerprint 
the cheese straws, but accept that this is an unacceptable level of restaurant 
paranoia.

Final rule: know your limits. Try to stop drinking in a restaurant before the 
claret is bubbling out of your eyes. Remember that one man's aperitif maison is 
another man's bucket of lager. One woman's flute of champagne is another's tuba 
of vodka. When Posh Spice tumbled out of Nobu Berkeley last year, I suspect 
she'd had a thimble of rosé, not six Tanqueray extra dry Martinis, as favoured 
by Ernest Hemingway. In the film Scarface, a Scotch-fuelled Al Pacino takes 
being drunk in a restaurant to terrifying method-acting heights as he rampages 
around the dining room screaming abuse at all the other customers. 'You don't 
have the guts to be what you wanna be,' he slurs, a lesson to all that it's 
best to keep your inner Scarface under control at all times. 'Say goodnight to 
the bad guy,' he shouts, exiting the restaurant. Goodnight.

Read Jan Moir's restaurant reviews on areyoureadytoorder.co.uk 
<http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk>
 A new review is added every Thursday

Three restaurants for top-notch drinks

Clarke's 124 Kensington Church Street, London W8 (020 7221 9225)

Every spring at Clarke's restaurant they serve their home-made vin d'orange. 
Seville oranges are macerated in rosé, lemon, sugar, vanilla, cinnamon and eau 
de vie for six weeks. After this, they add a slug of rum, then strain and 
bottle the pretty pink drink. Summery and delicious, it is the perfect aperitif.

The Star Inn Harome, North Yorkshire (01439 770397)

There's a lovely fire in the cosy thatched bar, where you can have a glass of 
champagne and ponder the wonders of a crab salad that comes with a bloody-Mary 
dressing: starter and aperitif rolled into one. The Star is one of the nicest 
places I know for pre-lunch drinks and then, of course, lunch itself.

Le Caprice Arlington Street, London SW1 (020 7629 2239)

Still one of London's most urbane restaurants, where staff will bring you a 
perfectly constructed, classic Caesar salad while coping expertly with any 
in-house calamity. Their famous Martinis are a civilised, rinky-dink little 
size, coiled with lemon peel or a bobbing olive.
