
About 10 minutes before midnight, my daughter Kaylee, my husband Randy and I 
were driving from home in Uniontown in Ohio to New York to see a Broadway show. 
It was July 2014.

It would normally take eight hours to get there. When we were about halfway 
there, about 20 minutes outside Danville, Pennsylvania, Randy and Kaylee 
switched seats so she was driving and I was beside her. I’d been texting my son 
Luke, who was in Afghanistan at the time. I put the phone down and was just 
recapping the conversation to Kaylee when I heard a big crack on the 
windshield. I don’t remember anything else until about six weeks later when I 
woke up in hospital surrounded by my family.

I could see very little. I could tell I was bandaged up and I felt 
uncomfortable, but I didn’t make any noise. I can’t remember what my first 
words were.

Randy told me that four teenagers had thrown a rock from an overpass at our 
car. It went straight through our windshield and hit my head. He and Kaylee 
said the rock hit me so hard they couldn’t identify where my right eye started 
or where my cheek and forehead were. My brain and skull were coming out of my 
head. I apparently woke up spluttering at the scene, choking on my own blood. I 
only survived because I could breathe through my head.

At the hospital the emergency room doctor told Randy that my brain was 
swelling and that they didn’t think I was going to make it. But two surgeons 
said that if they removed my forehead and the right side of my skull, my brain 
would have room to swell. A plastic skull was later put in its place.

I had several operations to have my eye socket reformed – but that was just 
the beginning of a great deal of surgery. Randy says the first time he saw a 
real sign of life in me was about three weeks after the accident, when he 
played a CD from the musical Jersey Boys. I was still unconscious, but all of a 
sudden my shoulders started to shake. I was dancing to the song Sherry in bed. 
Once I was awake and in recovery, therapists helped me with my speech and with 
physical things such as climbing steps.

I didn’t find out that I’d lose my right eye until that October. Not having 
sight in one eye causes differences in my perception of depth, which I’m still 
adapting to.

In September 2015 four boys, then aged 17 and 18, were all found guilty of 
several charges including aggravated assault, criminal trespass and throwing 
missiles into an occupied vehicle. They were given sentences ranging from a 
minimum of 11½ months to four and a half years. Many times I have wondered what 
kind of 18-year-old would throw a rock at a car to hurt someone. I was dating 
Randy when I was 16 and he was 17, and we felt like responsible people at that 
age, who could be held accountable for the things we did.

I do not feel angry any more, but I haven’t forgiven them because I feel the 
incident was intentional. One of them testified that after they threw the rock, 
they all cheered. That makes me sad. I have often questioned why this happened, 
and also why our car, and why our family. Last year Randy and I started 
campaigning to have a rule that all bridges have to have safety barriers. We 
want to see protective fencing on every bridge in every state.

Related: Experience: my plane was hijacked 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/19/my-plane-was-hijacked-experience>

I was a teacher and I thought I would be able to go back to school last year 
or this year. But that hasn’t happened. Right now I can’t see myself 
multitasking very much and if I went back today, working full-time would be a 
struggle. I go three times a week to get physical, speech and occupational 
therapy. I’ve had five seizures since this happened, so Randy makes sure 
there’s someone with me all the time.

When I look at the right side of my face I can see the damage, but Randy says 
nice things to me that make me feel just as attractive as before the incident. 
He says I always have a smile on my face, that I was great before this happened 
and I’m great now.

• As told to Marissa Charles
