
I start my day: With a milky earl grey tea. People think it’s an odd 
combination but I like it that way. The dynamics of my tea are very important 
to me.

My working day: is usually completely manic. There is so much interest in 
sugar consumption at the moment, we’re incredibly busy. I consider myself very 
lucky to be involved with this campaign at this stage.

If it’s a day when we’re releasing a big piece of work to the press, then I 
start very early, finalising the survey, checking the products and figures and 
liaising with our PR manager. We’ll then spend the day confirming interviews 
with Sky News, the BBC, Channel 4 and sending information to any companies 
implicated in the research.

On the day of interviews I’ll be up at 5am and might be doing interviews 
across London for 12 hours. It’s mad but usually very memorable. I used to be a 
bit nervous, but once you know the facts, you tend to enjoy it more and find it 
pretty exciting.

On a more normal day, we’ll be planning, reading academic papers, having 
meetings with various non-government organisations on how to align policies as 
well as liaising with the companies we are trying to influence.

I’ll usually have lunch at my desk, but of course there are some unspoken 
rules about what to eat in a team of nutritionists. Can you imagine if we all 
ate crisps every day? I’m bored of sandwiches so I try to be healthy and 
creative, making massive salads from quinoa or lentils.

I am responsible for a wide range of activities. From conducting initial 
research and doing all the data analysis, to working out how we need to 
communicate it. You have to be a bit of an all-rounder who is prepared to do a 
lot of the leg work and then stand up and talk about it.

The people I work with are massively passionate about nutrition and food. They 
have loads of ideas, and because we are a small team of nutritionists or 
academics we can bounce those ideas off each other.

My greatest work achievement was being interviewed by John Snow on Channel 4. 
I was terrified at first, and really had to be convinced to do it. He was 
lovely, and took the time to ensure he was pronouncing my name correctly. I 
even took a selfie with him.

How I made my career choice: When I originally chose my A levels I was unsure 
of what I really wanted to do. I thought maybe I wanted to be a teacher, but I 
was also interested in the two diverse topics of economics and nutrition. After 
graduating with my BSc, the area of food and nutrition still interested me, but 
within the context of understanding how global food decisions are made.


My first role out of university was for Unilever, which gave me a solid 
grounding, but I felt I had a pull towards public health and so moved onto to a 
role with Sustain: the alliance for better food and farming, campaigning on 
issues related to children’s food such as advertising to children and the 
reduction of salt, sugar and fat in those products.

It was while I was at Consensus Action on Salt and Health that I also studied 
for the MSc food policy at City University London. It was so beneficial to work 
first and then realise what I was passionate about, so I could make the right 
choice about which, if any, master’s would help me take my career to the next 
step.

I had previously met Professor Tim Lang, the then director of the Centre for 
Food Policy 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/arts-social-sciences/sociology/centre-for-food-policy> 
before and was struck by how knowledgeable he was, how well regarded in the 
sector and how so many people I met at CASH and other similar organisations had 
taken the MSc and attributed career success to it.

The course just joined everything together for me, gave me such a good 
understanding of global issues from agriculture, to supply chain to the 
marketing of products and the longer term impacts on the public’s health. The 
MSc food policy at City gave me the foundation for building my career and into 
my role at Action on Sugar. I’m now I’m going on to do my PhD.

At the end of the day after a day of media interviews, I just tend to crash 
out!

Outside of work I really do love to cook. It’s a bit of a competition for me 
to show how many different coloured vegetables I’ve managed to get into a 
veggie pasta. I like yoga, and wish I could socialise more, it’s just not easy 
when you’re so busy.

City University London offers a wide range of postgraduate courses designed to 
take skilled students into a diverse range of professions from food policy 
leaders to electrical engineers.

Kawther studied MSc Food Policy 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/courses/postgraduate/food-policy> at City University 
London which also houses theCentre for Food Policy 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/arts-social-sciences/sociology/centre-for-food-policy>, 
now headed up by leading food policy expert, Professor Corinna Hawkes.
