
Entering the Competition

 * The Guardian Small Business competition to win a mentor (the “Competition”) 
is open to UK residents aged 18 and over working at a business operating in the 
hospitality, professional services or retail industries with a turnover of less 
than £15m per year. You must have the permission of the organisation that you 
work for or with and which will be featured in any entry or will obtain the 
benefit of any prize, in order to enter.

 * The Competition is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the 
Competition.

 * Entrants into the Competition shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Competition you must complete the form hosted on the page: 
http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jun/15/enter-the-guardian-small-business-competition-win-a-mentor
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jun/15/enter-the-guardian-small-business-competition-win-a-mentor>
. No purchase is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or 
otherwise in connection with the Competition, please email us at 
ralph.harris-brown@theguardian.com with “Small Business win a mentor 
competition” in the subject line.

 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Competition entry to us. The winners shall be the 
owners of the email address from which the selected winning entries are sent. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 
 * The Competition opens at 12pm on 15 June 2015 and closes at 23:59 on 22 
July 2016. Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. 
GNM reserves the right in its absolute discretion to extend the closing date 
where the entries received are of insufficient quality. 
 * You own the copyright to your Competition entry as its author. 
 * By submitting an entry to the Competition, you give GNM: 
a. Permission for your entry to be published on GNM websites including but not 
limited to theguardian.com (“GNM Websites”) and on any social media account 
controlled by GNM, including but not limited to Facebook and Twitter accounts 
(“GNM Social Media Accounts”), and you grant GNM a non-exclusive, royalty-free, 
worldwide licence to use and publish your Competition entry in electronic 
format (including on GNM Websites and GNM Social Media Accounts) and hard copy 
(including in GNM publications) for purposes connected with the Competition, 
and to adapt the entry to enable such publication (including to crop or 
otherwise edit it for such purposes), and you hereby irrevocably waive, for the 
benefit of GNM, all moral rights in the entry to which you are entitled; and

b. The right to use your name and county of residence for the sole purpose of 
identifying you as the author of your entry and/or as a winner of the 
Competition.

10 Your entry must not be copied, must not contain any third-party materials 
and/or content that you do not have permission to use, must not promote any 
goods or services other than those of your organisation or include any trade 
marks (other than those belonging to the Promoter or your organisation), and 
must not show inappropriate or dangerous behaviour, or otherwise be obscene, 
defamatory, distasteful, offensive, or in breach of any applicable law or 
regulation, or in breach of any confidentiality obligations owed by you to 
third parties. If we have reason to believe your entry is in breach of this 
paragraph 10 then we may not consider it and may disqualify it.

11 We may disqualify your Competition entry for the following reasons: your 
entry does not comply with these Terms and Conditions; you have not obtained 
the consents detailed in paragraphs 1 above; your organisation has for any 
reason fallen into disrepute in the reasonable opinion of the Promoter; you are 
not eligible to enter the Competition; or you cannot be contacted. In the event 
of disqualification, we may select a new winner in accordance with the 
selection processes outlined below.

Picking the winners

12 A panel of judges, including at least one member who is independent of GNM, 
will select three winning entries, one from each industry sector (Hospitality, 
Professional Services, and Retail) from all valid entries received in 
accordance with these Terms and Conditions. Full details of the judging process 
and the names of the judges are available on request to 
ralph.harris-brown@theguardian.com.

13 When choosing the winners, the judges will consider the ambition 
demonstrated by the business, their future plans and possibility for growth, 
and how their challenges may be overcome or ambition reached with the help of a 
mentor.

14 The judges will select the winning entries on or after 25 July 2016. The 
judges’ decision is final and no correspondence will be entered into.

The Prizes

15 The winners will receive Mentoring advice from a successful business person 
to consist of one or more phone calls lasting at least 30 minutes and a 
face-to-face mentoring session lasting at least one hour. Only one winner per 
household. GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the 
prize that are not expressly included in the prize.

16 The winners will be notified by email on or after 26 July 216 and given 
details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 
14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be forfeited 
and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the 
process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification 
of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a 
winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, 
the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select 
another winner.

17 The prize will be sent to the winners by 31 March 2017. 

18 The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash 
or any other prize.

19 GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of 
similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available.

Some other rules

20 The name and county of the winners can be obtained after 31 August 2016 by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Marketing 
Department, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU.

21 The winners may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Competition and the winners shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winners consent to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the 
Competition for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and 
name for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and 
films, and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and 
its related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the 
Competition, all entrants consent to the same.

22 The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply 
to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Competition, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Competition entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 2 above

23 GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the 
Competition or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any 
injury or damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or 
resulting from participation in or downloading any materials in connection with 
the Competition. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the 
liability of GNM under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for 
death or personal injury resulting from its negligence.

24 GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Competition with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Competition is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into.

25 GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Competition where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure.

26 The Competition and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Competition submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts.

27 Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU.
