
This time last year I entered two long-distance mass-participation swimming 
events – both fairly substantial, including the Jubilee River 10km swim. At the 
last minute, just before both swims, I decided to pull out.


The reality is, I live in fear. Fear of coming last. 


When you have done something as epic as swimming the English Channel 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-swimming-blog/2013/aug/09/how-i-swam-english-channel>
 people think you are somehow superhuman: fearless and invincible. Many years 
have passed since my Channel swimming days, but I feel that people’s 
expectations of me are still high – and my own expectations are higher still.


Last year, in the run-up to the two events, I realised that I couldn’t cope 
with the ignominy of coming last. I had scrutinised the swim times of those who 
had completed the previous year and calculated that, at my current swim pace, I 
would probably have been placed last in both. I just couldn’t face it.


I’ve always been an average swimmer with shoddy technique – one of the back 
markers in any race. A distinct plodder. This is what made me stop competing in 
the pool and take up open-water swimming, where speed and sprinting matter 
less. But no matter how stoical I try to be, it’s depressing to start a 
swimming event, and almost immediately see everyone else in the field pull away 
ahead – while I am left at the back of the pack with a lone kayaker sweeping 
along behind, pulling encouraging faces that say “Aren’t you courageous!” I 
imagine they’re actually thinking, “Oh God, I’m going to be here ALL day!”


So, last year, in a dark moment of self-loathing, I just couldn’t face it. I 
convinced myself that it was OK to be a “no show” at the Jubilee swim if I just 
went to the pool and swam 10k on the same day instead. That evening, I logged 
on to Facebook and saw post upon post of proud and beaming faces of swimming 
friends whohad completed the Jubilee swim – grinning happily with medals round 
their necks. I could have cried.


When asked why I hadn’t done it, I was upfront. “Someone has to come last,” 
they said, or: “It’s not about the time, it’s about finishing.” I was soothed 
and hushed with sympathetic murmurs: “You would have been faster than all the 
people on the sofa.” All true, I knew. Still, the end of the summer came and I 
also “Did not start” the second long event I’d planned, so I ended the year 
feeling disappointed with myself.

But I’m a firm believer in new year’s resolutions and blank slates, and when 
January 2016 came around, I decided to enter those same events again.


It started with an email to the race organisers of the Jubilee River 10k. I 
asked them if they had a cut-off time for completing the event, as I was 
worried I wouldn’t make it. A personal reply from the race organiser reassured 
me: “Please come and swim – and don’t worry about a cut-off time, we’d love to 
have you.” His enthusiastic and non-judgmental invitation was just what I 
needed. I filled in the entry form. I also encouraged others from my swimming 
club to enter. I hoped this would make it harder for me to wriggle out of it, 
and might make me train harder.


For a few months, I trained hard, but didn’t get any faster. I was still 
looking at finishing the swim at the back of the field. In fact, I wondered if 
I might even finish, never mind come last.


Then it was Sunday, 5 June 2016, the day of the Jubilee River 10k. I got up at 
6am, slapped on some sunscreen, packed my swimming kit, gulped down some 
porridge and set off. It took all my willpower to leave the house. I steeled 
myself for a long day of swimming and the inevitable worries that precede these 
events plagued me: worries about the cold; fear of failure to finish; failure 
to be enough of an inspiration, failure in my own estimation. And fear of 
coming last.

I had told my club team mates that I couldn’t offer them lifts because I would 
be too long in the water and they would have finished hours before me, so I 
drove there alone with my thoughts. Wearing a T-shirt emblazoned WORLD’S 
OKAYEST SWIMMER I hoped that humour and self-deprecation would mask my anxiety 
as I turned up for the early registration for slower swimmers.


The Jubilee River is a relief channel for the Thames, not far outside London. 
The swim route bends and winds downstream towards Eton, with swimmers exiting 
the water three times to pick their way around weirs. Green and lush, with no 
boat traffic, swans and red brick walls pepper the river, making it look like a 
Stanley Spencer painting.


The event started at 9.30am, with me and around 100 other swimmers anxiously 
hovering and eager to start, in the first (and slowest) wave. As I swam along, 
the river was quiet and clean and everything around was tranquil. The sun 
blazed. Meadows rolled by, reeds and flowers lined the riverbank, and every now 
and again a spectator from the towpath would wave or peer at the scene 
unfolding in the water.


As the day wore on, somehow I didn’t mind that, predictably, almost everyone 
was ahead. There were at leastsome swimmers in my vicinity still, and although 
we shared the same river we quietly occupied our own spaces. As I concentrated 
on doing my own thing, sploshing away rhythmically stroke after stroke, 
watching the sky, the greenness of the water, the bank, the other swimming caps 
passing or not passing, I realised I was enjoying myself. The first half of the 
swim was busy – with swimmers from other, faster, waves catching up and 
passing. And there were flurries of activity at the weirs. Kind encouragement 
was doled out from race officials at the weirs/feeding stations.


And, finally, after a long time swimming, I had nearly finished. 


As I drew up to the last few hundred metres, I caught sight of my team mates – 
who had started laterand finished earlier than me – on a bridge above. They 
were wildly and enthusiastically waving and jumping up and down and cheering 
for me as I plodded by. I managed a wan smile and asked how long there was to 
go. “Just one more bend to swim!” they shouted back.


Four hours and 29 minutes after I’d started, I staggered out of the water, 
grabbed the hand of a smiling steward, who pulled me up the slippery bank where 
I was greeted with a smile, a handshake and a “well done” from the race 
organiser. I glanced back over my shoulder towards the water and noticed that 
there were a small handful of swimmers who were still to finish, behind me, out 
of a field of around 300. But it didn’t matter either way. I was just relieved, 
proud and happy to finish.


As I drove away, my thoughts turned to my next long race of the season and how 
much I was looking forward to it, my fears of coming last gently receding.


Jubilee River 10k swim <http:// 
https://regonline.activeeurope.com/builder/site/default.aspx?EventID=1549779>


Coniston Chillswim end to end  
<http://chillswim.com/the-swims/coniston-end-to-end/>

You can hear Sally discussing her swimming adventures in this podcast 
<http://www.livebeyond.co/podcast-episode-10-sally-goble-endurance-and-arctic-swimming-adventures/>

