
Forty-one years ago, on a cool spring night in Hollywood, I found myself 
standing across a pool table fromJohn Lennon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/johnlennon>.

He was a symphony in black, right down to his leather trousers. His hair hung 
to his shoulders. Little black-lensed sunglasses perched at the end of his long 
thin-tipped nose as he leaned over to stroke the cue ball. He seemed off in a 
world of his own. Was he drunk? High? Both? The night before – word had spread 
quickly around town – he had walked into Whisky à Go-Go nightclub with a Kotex 
sanitary towel taped to his forehead.

It was late March 1974, and Lennon was on his infamous “lost weekend”, having 
left Yoko Ono and split for the coast with a young woman named May Pang. She 
too was at the table, pretty and friendly, but it was Lennon who fixed my 
attention. I had been 12 when the Beatles appeared on theEd Sullivan Show, a 
jolt of sheer joy to blow away the pall of President Kennedy’s assassination. 
The group had broken up, but their aura had not diminished.

The place was the home of the erstwhile Rat Packer Peter Lawford, an opulent 
apartment occupying the second floor of a house just south of Sunset Boulevard: 
what passed for reduced circumstances in Tinseltown. The place was packed with 
the famous and beautiful — Ringo Starr was also there that night, and Mick 
Jagger and his then-wife Bianca, and any number of other pretty faces. It was a 
hallucinatory evening, though I myself partook of nothing stronger than a few 
beers and many cigarettes, in spite of the fact that I didn’t smoke.

I was in Hollywood with my brother Peter, covering the Oscars for Harper’s 
Magazine, having somehow bamboozled that esteemed journal’s editor into giving 
us a big assignment and expense money, notwithstanding the fact that neither of 
us had ever written a word for a publication outside of high-school and college 
newspapers. We were young and ballsy. It also helped our cause that my brother 
was friends with Peter Lawford’s son Christopher, who had promised not only to 
take photos for our article but, through his father, to hook us up with lots of 
stars.

And here they were.

John prowled the table with his cue. His pool wasn’t worth a lick, but it 
didn’t matter. As he lined up his shots, he was singing “O Solzhenitsyn” to the 
tune of “O Sole Mio” …

I wanted in the worst way to say something to him, to make contact – but what 
could I say? I was 22, and impossibly intimidated, not just by him, but by the 
wall he’d built around himself. I lit Bianca Jagger’s cigarette that night, and 
traded pool-table jokes with Ringo, who was as down to earth as any guy you 
might meet in a working-man’s bar. But John Lennon? He was in a world of his own
.


Sinatra: The Chairman by James Kaplan is published by Sphere at £30. To order 
a copy for £24, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/340499/s/sinatra-the-chairman/>
