
Aid agencies jostle for public attention as they respond to humanitarian 
crises: natural disaster, war, famine and disease. The Disasters Emergency 
Committee, which comprises 14 British NGOs working internationally, has appeals 
open for Gaza and Ebola. Yet while its tsunami-earthquake appeal in 2004 raised 
£392m, its 2008 appeal for the Democratic Republic of the Congo generated only 
£10.5m. Why do some emergencies receive more support than others?We asked 
students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/nov/06/students-speak-why-do-humanitarian-crises-receive-varying-levels-of-support>
 to share their thoughts on the reasons behind funding imbalances and whether a 
fairer system was possible. We received lots of responses, including some 
excellent articles from students at Holmes Chapel comprehensive school and 
sixth form college. Here are some of our favourites.

Separate aid from politics

Aid <http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> is political. Politics 
causes competition. Competition creates havoc. When a natural disaster occurs, 
governments and NGOs rush to help out. They build tents. They hand out 
blankets. They provide food. But the underlying incentive of all these 
organisations is the same: trying to capitalise on the public’s pulled 
heartstrings and setting themselves out to enhance their own popularity and 
prestige. After the Haiti earthquake in 2010 the US pushed its military to 
support the relief effort, due to its close proximity to the affected area. 
Thus a large consortium of US NGOs caused many instances of “flag-raising”, 
without clear co-operation between the organisations and the locals. Support 
was therefore misguided and not well received by Haitians.

On the other hand, the Kashmir earthquake in 2005 initially received only 
$100,000 in aid from the US – the same given to them by Afghanistan after 
Hurricane Katrina. Although later upped to over $100m, original skepticism by 
the Bush administration highlighted tension between the two nations, regardless 
of such a catastrophic death toll. For fairer distribution, an apolitical 
department of the UN could be created to co-ordinate and authorise the NGOs in 
the immediate wake of a disaster. The department would give aid based on a 
category of severity, with each nation pledging a set amount in proportion to 
its GDP. During relief, the organisation will manage NGOs effectively to 
maximise efficiency and reduce egotistical incentives.

Harry Thompson, Holmes Chapel school, UK

Change the way the media reports crises 

Human nature is such that we respond more forcefully to emotional appeals than 
to facts. As a result, some emergencies, like natural disasters, receive more 
support because of the way they are perceived by the public. This is based on 
the presentation by the media. For example, media and social media present 
natural disasters as unexpected, undeserved and random. Civil wars, on the 
other hand, are presented and perceived as somehow more deserved and therefore 
receive less funding. This creates an environment where relief is largely 
determined by factors that have nothing to do with need.

The media tends to focus on the disaster as it happens, ignoring the warning 
systems and long-term implications. Decisions are made about which disasters to 
cover, and natural disasters, due to their seemingly sudden onset, make more 
shocking news and therefore receive more coverage. This focused attention 
ignores key facts and can distort the humanitarian response.

One example of this was the difference between the coverage of the tsunami in 
2004 and the earthquake in Kashmir in 2005. Images and stories from tourists on 
holiday in the region, the event happening on Boxing Day and the extreme 
language used by the media led to a much greater response for the former. The 
earthquake received little coverage, money or sympathy as it occurred soon 
after the tsunami, to a nationality the west was wary of. The system would have 
to be completely reinvented in order for fairer allocation of funds.

Lucy McCray, London School of Economics, UK

Change the way funds are allocated

The cultural relevance of a particular humanitarian crisis to an audience, 
along with the volatility of the crisis, impacts upon the media presence and 
consequently the level of support received. As an audience you need a point of 
identification with a humanitarian crisis. Humanitarian agencies often spend 
considerable amounts of time and resources in an attempt to humanise a crisis; 
to ensure that there is greater visibility in an attempt to attract donors. 
However with humanitarian emergencies seemingly becoming a regular occurrence 
within the media, I question whether this high level of exposure that appears 
necessary to attract donors is sustainable.

Emergency appeals are launched, at the outbreak of a humanitarian emergency 
however the finances are needed imminently. If funds were allocated on a 
continuous basis, operating on levies based upon the GDP of a country then 
there would be no need for humanitarian agencies to jostle for centre stage in 
the media spotlight and funds. The UK’s levy would come from our already 
assigned foreign aid budget and be allocated to humanitarian agencies on a 
“need” basis ensuring that money is not withheld and humanitarian needs are met.

Liam Upson, University of East Anglia, UK

Find new ways to make the public care

“In with the new and out with the old,” as they say. While such a colloquial 
phrase, such as this, is deeply embedded into our global society, is it 
possible to veer away from such a narrow-sighted mentality? Demographically 
speaking, notions including age, sex, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, 
nationality and religion are all contributing factors that influence national 
or international onlookers – be that individuals from the civil, political, 
and/or private sectors. Referencing today’s trending disaster, Ebola 
exemplifies the aforementioned. A deadly disease spreading like wildfire in the 
global south apparently does not warrant international attention or timely WHO 
mediation, until the virus slithers beyond west Africa’s borders, making this 
an outbreak that penetrates the semantics that segregate developed from 
developing countries.

While there is a silver lining to this story, other stories currently being 
written into history are lacking our attention and support—how do we 
repopularise the situation in Syria? How can we sound the sirens for the 
‘coffee rust’ disaster, which is ruining an exorbitant amount of livelihoods 
and displacing vulnerable populations? Can social media pull us out of our 
narrow-sighted view and refashion response to humanitarian emergencies?

A fairer system for funding allocation is possible, but only if we as an 
international community hold those responsible of the funding accountable. 
Top-down policies from an honest and responsive government and bottom-up voices 
from an active and accountable civil society can certainly foster an 
environment whereby funding is allocated in a much more effective and efficient 
matter.

Nick Skenderian, University of Copenhagen School of Global Health, Denmark

Foreign policy comes first


Rapid responses to humanitarian emergencies are rare, despite continuing and 
developing conflicts which result in civilian casualties and food shortages, 
this trend of lethargic, half-hearted response or inaction is unlikely to 
change. Arguably, the three largest humanitarian relief missions in recent 
years, in Haiti, Japan and the Philippines, have one factor in common – natural 
disasters.


Countries affected by natural disasters that alter their geographical, 
economic and societal landscapes tend to receive greater amounts of aid and 
with less conditions attached than countries experiencing civil wars or 
terrorist insurgencies that result in similar if not more severe consequences.

One reason for this could be the greater likelihood of success associated with 
post-natural disaster interventions where potential domestic political or 
social divisions within a country are temporarily tolerated while the more 
immediate concerns are overcome. Also, in such situations, there is often more 
unconditional support from the international community that do not have fears 
of jeopardising foreign policy objectives or risk greater regional instability 
and when the political and human costs of intervention are arguably lower than 
in countries currently in conflict. However, since the debacle following the 
Haitian cholera outbreak in which UN forces were blamed, even supposedly 
peaceful non-military interventions are under increasing scrutiny.

If governments and international organisations decided on whether or not to 
intervene purely on moral grounds to avert human suffering, then funding for 
such operations would surely be greater and more unconditional yet the motives 
behind humanitarian interventions are seemingly increasingly political in 
nature.

Timothy Sandars, University of East Anglia, UK

We only worry when the west is threatened

Ebola is an infectious disease with a high potential to spread across the 
world. The more prominent the disease is in western Africa, the more 
threatening it becomes to the richer countries – most of which are in the west 
– so African countries are granted more aid.


 There are humanitarian emergencies that do not or have not received equal aid 
as the Ebola outbreak, whether this is financial aid or emergency supplies. For 
example, the 100-day mass genocide in Rwanda in 1994 was completely devastating 
and an estimated 500,000-1,000,000 Rwandans were slaughtered. Yet, despite the 
huge threat to innocent Rwandans that this had, Russia, the UK and America 
insisted on only a small, cheap peace-keeping effort. It would be limited to 
Rwanda’s capital city, Kigali, and there would be no seizing of weapons – only 
observing.

Famine and civil war are still at large in South Sudan, yet western 
governments choose to ignore them. This is a country in desperate need of 
financial aid, yet it seems to be only Oxfam that funds the supply of emergency 
aid into South Sudan.


The difference between the Ebola outbreak and the above crises is that Ebola 
isn’t limited to just Africa. The trend seems to be that if the disaster is 
limited to a certain country or area and can’t affect the richer corners of the 
world then less aid is given. Does the current aid attempt in western Africa 
aim more to protect the western Africans or the western world?

Chris Buckley, Holmes Chapel school, UK


Now over to you – why do you think some humanitarian emergencies receive more 
support than others, and is this a problem? Leave your thoughts in the comment 
thread below.

