
Taylor Swift and Tom Hiddleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tom-hiddleston> might not be the celebrity 
super-couple we deserve, but they are the celebrity super-couple we need. In 
times as fraught as these – surrounded as we are by tragedy in the US, violence 
in Europe and the threat of long-term political turmoil in the UK – we as 
a people need a balm, something to soothe our troubled souls and remind us that 
this miserable excuse for a planet is not completely lost. We need, in short, a 
photograph of Tom Hiddleston snogging Taylor Swift on a rock.

Related: Tom Hiddleston and Taylor Swift pictures: as close as we'll get to 
two memes dating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/15/taylor-swift-tom-hiddleston-dating-rumors-photos-beach>

This always happens. In our darkest hour, life will always find a way. During 
the horrors of the second world war, for instance, people found solace in the 
patriotic music of Vera Lynn. In the days after last year’s Paris attacks, they 
found an outlet inKay Burley’s ridiculous photo of a sullen golden retriever 
<https://twitter.com/KayBurley/status/665807478060392448?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>. 
And now, when it truly feels as if the world is falling to pieces around us; 
when everyone seems to be tearfully flailing around in the dark, hoping against 
hope to find something – anything – that can offer the smallest hint that 
humanity is capable of something other than relentless cruelty, we are shown a
photograph of Hiddleston eating Swift’s face clean off her head 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1290205/the-steamy-pictures-that-reveal-taylor-swift-and-tom-hiddlestons-secret-romance-to-the-world/>
.

These are the images we should run towards today. Hiddleston and Swift, two 
people who have respectively become our communal boyfriend and BFF, recipients 
of more botched pencil-drawn Tumblr fan-art than anyone else alive, 
have finally found one another. The Gatekeeper has found the Keymaster. If 
these photographs – specifically that one of them kissing with their heads 
tilted in a painful-looking way because they are both too stupid to take off 
their sunglasses – don’t usher in the literal Age of Aquarius, then frankly we 
are a lost cause.

Sure, there are plenty of questions to be asked about this glorious union, but 
they can be answered another time. We don’t need to concern ourselves with how 
poor Calvin Harris, until recently Taylor’s most conspicuous male photography 
companion, is taking the news. Nor do we need to follow Twitter’s lead by 
immediately wondering if the small pile of stones stacked behind them is
conclusive proof that they are both members of the Illuminati 
<https://twitter.com/tylercoates/status/743197204186267648?ref_src=twsrc^tfw>. 
And while, for the sake of history, we should quickly agree on a standardised 
composite nickname for them both – be it TomTay or Taylom or Twiddleswift – 
this too should be delayed until the magnitude of the event has properly sunk 
in.

Because this feels like vindication. This feels like proof that love is 
stronger than hate. If these two attractive millionaires can kiss each other on 
a rock by the sea, like two Little Mermaid sculptures trying to meld skulls, 
then life is still worth living.

We didn’t know it at the time, but we’ve been watching this burgeoning 
relationship from its earliest breath. We saw the video of Hiddleston and Swift
dancing together at this year’s Met Gala 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3572733/Taylor-Swift-Tom-Hiddleston-hit-dancefloor-Met-Gala.html>
, and we thought nothing of it. We thought we were simply witnessing some 
blurry iPhone footage of two selfconscious strangers obnoxiously failing to 
move their limbs with any real amount of coordination during an event that Tina 
Fey once described as a “fart cloud”. But we were not. With the benefit of 
hindsight, it turns out that we were actually watching Romeo meet Juliet. We 
were watching Antony meet Cleopatra. We were, make no mistake, watching Richard 
meet Judy.

And now this attraction has blossomed into all-out love. It must be love, 
after all, because only love can cause two people with such an intense grasp on 
their public image to wander out to a public spot and openly kiss before 
awkwardly turning around to acknowledge the photographer who, realistically, 
they must have known was there all along.

Clearly, now is the time to give Hiddleston and Swift some space. This is a 
new love, and all they really know about one another is that they look annoying 
when they dance and that they absolutely refuse to kiss without their 
sunglasses on, no matter the damage they are obviously causing to their spines. 
They need time to get to know one another, to get used to each other’s patterns 
and behaviours and tedious Owen Wilson impersonations that they keep 
shoehorning into conversations for no real reason. They deserve that much from 
us.

But not for long, because they belong to us now. Hiddleston and Swift 
represent all that is good in the world. We must pin all we have – all our 
hopes, dreams and ambitions – on them as fiercely as we can. Because in this 
crazy, messed-up world, they are our last true shot at happiness. They are 
proof that, together, we can do anything. Because now we have a slightly 
suspicious-looking photograph of Hiddleston kissing Swift on a rock, and that’s 
all we’re ever going to need.
