
Here at the Guardian Small Business Network we know that some of the best 
advice, insight and inspiration for running a business can be found at the 
heart of the SME community from those doing it every day - fellow small 
businesses. We are calling for small businesses to join the network and share 
their most useful and inspiring business advice, in fewer than 100 words for a 
chance to win £50,000 of advertising with the Guardian.

Join the network and share your advice here 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/small-business/>

Top entrepreneurs share their advice:

Kanya King, founder, MOBO Awards
 Photograph: guardian.co.uk 
You need the determination to make it work, the persistence to keep at it when 
things do not go according to plan and the absolute conviction that anything is 
possible if you really believe in it hard enough. Understand and accept that 
more often than not there will be no "instant gratification" when you start up 
your own business. Running a business is having the stamina to go all the way. 
Whenever you fail or make mistakes, pick yourself up, get back on your feet and 
learn the lessons and apply them. Use that enriched experience to go faster and 
better.

James Caan, founder and CEO, Hamilton Bradshaw
 Photograph: Sarah Lee 
Have a smart growth strategy and your SME will achieve real long-term success: 
Small and medium sized enterprises obviously has a huge part to play in the UK 
economic recovery and focusing on growth and expansion will in turn lead to the 
creation of more jobs. To successfully grow your SME it is vital to understand 
the unique nature of the business proposition and the market it serves, that 
should always be your starting point. It is also extremely important to have a 
robust and workable growth strategy in place and to review it at regular 
intervals.

Justine Roberts, co-founder, Mumsnet
 Photograph: guardian.co.uk 
Do your research, know your competition and look for a USP. Then make sure you 
listen to your audience/customers and always keep listening.

Read more advice and visit the full competition site here » 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/small-business-network/advertising-competition>

Click to read the full competition terms and conditions 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/small-business-network/2013/june/5/terms-and-conditions>
