
Forget millet, quinoa and brown rice: there’s a new grain in town.

Sorghum, an ancient grain from the dry African plains, is finally finding its 
way into restaurants throughout the United States. Whether it’s a drizzled on 
top of desserts, mixed into salads, or used in a no-rice risotto, chefs turned 
onto the ingredient have fallen in love with it.

“It’s called the ‘wonder grain’,” says Chef Michelle Bernstein 
<http://chefmichellebernstein.com/> of Cena by Michy and Seagrape restaurants 
in Miami, “And as a chef, it truly is a wonder.”

Bernstein explains that her restaurant – like many others – had been 
incorporating quinoa into the menu but that without variety, food becomes 
boring. “Our lives can’t just be about quinoa,” she says.

Other than sorghum’s versatility, its texture that really gives it an edge 
over other grains: “It fills your mouth and your stomach.”

Though it’s the fifth most popular cereal crop in the world, sorghum was 
largely ignored in the US until recently. While sweet sorghum molasses has 
brightened traditional southern cooking for generations, the grain itself has 
been mostly used as feed for cows and livestock. But when the drought hit, 
grain farmers started looking for something delicious and drought-resistant to 
plant, and sorghum’s popularity exploded.

In today’s health-conscious world, a grain as versatile as sorghum that is 
also gluten-free, easier on the digestive system, and rich in antioxidants, 
vitamins, and protein is basically a sure thing. Plus, it’s eco-friendly. An 
acre of sorghum uses a third-less water than an acre of corn and fewer 
expensive fertilizers too.

Hugo’s <http://hugosrestaurant.com/>, a restaurant chain California, has not 
only substituted sorghum for many rice dishes – spanish rice, horchata, 
flatbreads, among others – but they put a public statement about it right on 
the menu.

“Introducing sorghum: the drought-tolerant, low-water-usage, wonder grain,” 
Tom Kaplan, co-owner and founder, reads off the menu. “I’m trying to introduce 
sorghum not just to our customers but to other restaurants because it could 
save millions of pounds of water.”

Rice isn’t out entirely – the restaurant goes through about 25 tons of the 
stuff per year (at about 300 gallons of water to produce each pound) – but in 
the last six to eight months they’ve been playing with their first ton of 
organic sorghum.

Kaplan boasts, “While other restaurants are doing one or two things with 
sorghum, we’re doing dozens.” In the 35 years the restaurant has been open, 
they’ve always been at the forefront of trends – quinoa, chai, vegan and even 
gluten-free. So the fact that Hugo’s has taken up sorghum as it’s newest focus 
is a good sign for the grain; the gastronomic equivalent of being signed to a 
major Hollywood agent or having your book on Oprah.

It’s important to note that eating sorghum isn’t just a (small) environmental 
cause.

Marc Forgione, chef and co-owner of Restaurant Marc Forgione 
<http://www.marcforgione.com/> in New York, is adamant that eating is still the 
most important part of going out to a restaurant. They use all kinds of sorghum 
on their menu and Forgione (who avoids gluten himself) is a personal fan. “I 
like it because it tastes good,” he says. “I’m a chef first and foremost, not a 
doctor.”

He’s even used it in a dish called “space breads”, the recipe for which sounds 
like a concoction thought up over a few post-shift beers. What if we took 
dough, foamed it out of a whipped cream canister, dyed it green, cooked it, and 
then put escargot on top to make it look like they were crawling over moss? 
It’s weird and brilliant and 100% gluten-free!

Another advantage sorghum has over its more established cousins is that it’s 
cheap. “Even if the price goes up two or three times, it’ll still be cheaper 
than quinoa,” Kaplan says. In fact, he actually hopes the price does increase 
since it would encourage more farmers to grow it and get it onto even more 
plates throughout the country. As Kaplan says, “Sorghum is a staple ingredient 
in Africa, India, China, Australia, Central America, Mexico … it’s time for it 
to become a staple ingredient in the United States instead of cattle feed and 
biofuel.”
