
George Osborne <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> will on 
Thursday invite England’s big cities to join Manchester in bidding for devolved 
powers, as long as they agree to be governed by a directly elected mayor.

The chancellor will also announce that the Queen’s speech will include powers 
to deliver Greater Manchester’s first mayor through the cities devolution bill.

The powers on offer to combined authorities with an elected mayor will cover 
transport, housing, planning, policing and public health.

In Manchester, in his first speech of the new parliament, Osborne will 
underline his personal commitment to the concept of city devolution saying
Greater Manchester <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> will be 
entitled to elect its first mayor in 2017.


He will say: “The old model of trying to run everything in our country from 
the centre of London is broken. It’s led to an unbalanced economy. It’s made 
people feel remote from the decisions that affect their lives. It’s not good 
for our prosperity or our democracy.”

He will tell the cities: “It is time for you to take control of your own 
affairs.”

The chancellor will say that he will give the cities the necessary levers to 
grow their local economies and make sure local people keep the rewards. But 
there is no suggestion at this stage that he will give them substantial new 
tax-raising powers.

Osborne will also annoy many Labour leaders in local government by insisting 
he will only transfer the powers if the cities in a combined authority agree to 
a directly elected mayor. InLiverpool <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool>
, for instance, the elected Labour city mayor, Joe Anderson, supports the idea 
of further devolution, but has not been able to win the support of other local 
government leaders in the region for a mayor to represent the wider region.

There is also resistance elsewhere in cities such as Leeds and Newcastle, but 
the new communities secretary, Greg Clark, may have greater success in changing 
minds on the basis that the powers on offer are so substantial that it is worth 
shifting to a city mayor structure.

Osborne will argue: “It’s right people have a single point of accountability. 
Someone they elect, who takes the decisions and carries the can.

“So with these new powers for cities must come new city-wide elected mayors 
who work with local councils. I will not impose this model on anyone. But nor 
will I settle for less.

“London has a mayor. Greater Manchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> has agreed to have a mayor as part 
of our northern powerhouse – and this new law will make that happen.

“My door now is open to any other major city who‎ wants to take this bold step 
into the future.”

He has also confirmed that the spending review due later this year will 
contain the major investments already set out to build the northern powerhouse, 
covering railways, roads and science parks.


The Greater Manchester mayor will have powers covering a devolved and 
consolidated transport budget, with a multi-year settlement to be agreed at the 
next spending review, franchised bus services, strategic planning, a new 
housing investment fund and the functions of the police and crime commissioner.


Manchester will also be entitled to bid alongside the Department for Work and 
Pensions (DWP) for the next phase of the Work Programme.

In addition, Manchester and Greater Manchester clinical commissioning groups 
will be invited to develop a business plan for the integration of health and 
social care across Greater Manchester, based on control of existing health and 
social care budgets.

 * Join Lyn Gardner for a Guardian Live debate about nationhood and devolution 
at Home in Manchester on Saturday 23 May 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/a-nations-theatre-nationhood-and-devolution-16713147474>