
Police forces are contacting MPs around the country to advise them on their 
security following the killing of Jo Cox.

The National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) said the advice was to help 
politicians to take appropriate measures to deal with any risks or threats they 
faced.

The intervention came as parliamentary authorities prepared for discussions 
about the “serious work” needed to improve security for MPs in the wake of 
Cox’s death. Westminster sources told the Guardian that meetings would take 
place over the next few days to see what more could be done to support 
politicians.

The chair of the home affairs select committee, Keith Vaz, said he wanted a 
review of security, revealing that a number of MPs had been speaking to police 
officers in their constituencies to ask what more they could do to protect 
themselves.

Chris Grayling, the leader of the House of Commons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>, said: “Obviously we all 
have to learn the lessons from this tragedy and do everything we can to protect 
MPs. For now, all our attention is on Jo Cox’s family.”

Meanwhile, the Labour MP Stephen Kinnock, who shared an office with Cox at 
Westminster, said he had cause to report a threat of violence towards him to 
the police on Thursday – hours before the murder of his political colleague and 
friend.


Kinnock said he reported the threat of violence, which he received via email, 
to South Wales police. It was part of a what he said was a tsunami of abuse he 
received following an article in the Daily Mail which accused his family of 
having the “greediest snouts in the EU trough”.

Kinnock said his policy was always to report threats of violence to the 
police. “I think MPs should always report to the police when there’s a threat 
of violence and the police should try to find out who that person is and get a 
sense of whether there really is a credible threat. Then they can do something 
about it. If you don’t report it at all, they can’t do anything about it,” he 
said.

Many MPs receive threats and abuse via online media – something some choose to 
report to police, while others brush aside.

It was also reported that a female MP had raised concerns about security with 
David Cameron in May last year, warning of a possible fatality if action was 
not taken.

No 10 confirmed that Cameron responded to the MP “and voiced deep concern”. In 
addition, a No 10 spokesman said, Theresa May, the home secretary had written 
to the MP to echo the prime minister’s words as well as contacting the chief 
constable of the MP’s local police force. The chief whip of the MP’s party also 
met the politician.

David James, co-founder of a threat assessment group that is supported by the 
Home Office and Metropolitan police, said politicians needed training to 
recognise cases of concern.

James, who started the Fixed Threat Assessment Centre more than a decade ago, 
said there were “warning behaviours” that MPs needed to be aware of, including 
letter-writing, door-stepping, years of complaints and protesting outside 
parliament.

“You can’t predict the future, but you can try to prevent things by 
recognising warning behaviours and evaluating and managing risk,” he said.

Harry Fletcher, director of the Digital Trust who works with victims of online 
threats and abuse, said a security triage system was needed in the House of 
Commons to help MPs assess the risk of threats.

He said: “Huge numbers of MPs are getting this kind of abuse. Some of it is 
very threatening indeed and I think the police have got to start prioritising 
the investigation of that aspect of this abuse.

“MPs need to start reporting it – many are not, they put it down as part of 
the job, but it is not. House of Commons security needs to use a triage system 
to examine the treat, to see if it contains any of the red flags – threats of 
violence, threats of sexual offences, if its an obsessive fixated individual, 
all those things.”

Jess Phillips, the Labour MP for Birmingham Yardley, has made police reports 
several times about violent and sexualised threats she has received. Two weeks 
ago, she made a further report to West Midlands police after receiving threats 
of violence. In the past, she has spoken of receiving 600 rape threats in one 
day after joining a campaign headed by MP Yvette Cooper to end sexist bullying 
online.

On Thursday, as the news of the murder of her friend and political colleague 
came through, Phillips appealed for the misogynistic violence she had received 
to stop. “Just for one day, perhaps this misogyny could just let up. My 
beautiful friend was murdered today,” she wrote.

A spokesman for the NPCC said MPs were being advised to reassess their 
personal security measures following the murder of Cox and police were offering 
advice on appropriate measures to deal with the range of security issues they 
faced, including at their constituency surgeries, where many have an open door 
policy rather than an appointment system.

“The advice is supported by a range of security measures developed by the 
police to support MPs, working closely with the Independent Parliamentary 
Standards Authority and other partners,” said the NPCC.

“Police forces are contacting their local MPs to reiterate our advice and 
consider any new security concerns they may have. Officers will offer further 
guidance and advice where an MP requests it on a case by case basis depending 
on any specific threat or risk.”

In the months leading up to her murder, Cox had been subjected to threats via 
social media which she reported to the Met police. The communications are not 
linked to the subsequent attack on her. In March, a man was arrested and 
cautioned for malicious communications.


West Yorkshire police said on Friday they were aware of two previous unrelated 
incidents which culminated in Cox receiving a malicious communication of a 
sexual nature at her parliamentary office in Westminster. “Both incidents were 
investigated by the Metropolitan police service which resulted in an individual 
receiving an adult caution for one offence, which I can confirm is not the same 
person who we have in custody. The other incident remains undetected.”

In January, the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority wrote to all MPs 
about security, explaining what types of security would be covered for 
politicians.


 It told politicians that if they had received a specific threat or been a 
victim of crime then they should report that to their local police immediately.



