
Our friend and colleague Keith Walker, who has died of cancer aged 67, was an 
art teacher, university lecturer and exam-board administrator. In the course of 
his professional life – through his practice, his written papers, and his 
cogent educational philosophy – he made an extraordinary and far-reaching 
contribution to thousands of students and teachers, and to art education 
nationally.

Keith was born in Ulverston, Cumbria (but then part of Lancashire), the only 
child of Frank, who ran a mobile Co-op shop in the local area, and Margaret 
(nee Baines). After the family moved to Manchester he was educated at Urmston 
grammar school, a link that he valued for the rest of his life.

Following BA and MA courses at the University of Birmingham, he moved back to 
the north and a career teaching art in Bury and Salford. In 1985 Keith worked 
as gallery education officer at DrumcroonArt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign> Education Centre, a 
groundbreaking institution for practice in art and design education. Supported 
by Wigan local education authority, the Drumcroon centre brought together 
school and college students, teachers and artists in collaborative projects, 
residencies and exhibitions.

Keith was instrumental in pioneering gallery-based art education for primary 
and secondary students, initially in Wigan and ultimately on a national scale. 
His initiatives still underpin much of the good classroom practice and 
principles of assessment in art and design. Keith then went on to work at 
Manchester Met University as course leader and senior lecturer on the PGCE and 
MA art teacher training courses.

In addition to his role as tutor and lecturer, he worked for the Northern 
Examinations and Assessment Board, which later, after its amalgamation with the 
Southern Examining Group, became the Assessment and Qualifications Alliance 
(AQA). At the outset of the national curriculum he was instrumental in drawing 
up the national criteria and assessment objectives for GCSE art and design. He 
subsequently played a leading role in guiding the development of all AQA art 
and design GCSE specifications.

Keith was unstintingly passionate about art education – and his colleagues at 
AQA were always confident that his principles of fairness and equal opportunity 
were embedded in his judgment and decisions.

He was a member of the Labour party and a proud Manchester City season ticket 
holder. Keith is survived by his wife, Sheila, whom he married in 1970. A son, 
Iain, predeceased him.
