
Q After a season dominated by short hemlines I am thrilled to find out from my 
fashion friends that in Autumn 2007 we will be offered a longer hemline. Which 
shops are embracing the longer look skirts for next season? I can't wait to 
stock up.
Cat

A Hemlines are indeed coming down. The new length for autumn/winter is called 
the midi, and falls just below the knee. You can find a variety of different 
designs in the new midi-length, from a gathered Forties style to a 
figure-hugging pencil skirt. This latter style shone on the catwalks at Chanel 
in blue and black hound's-tooth tweed and at Lanvin in black satin. They look 
best styled with a belt to create a cinched waist, and teamed with a slim, 
fitted jacket and ankle boots. The midi will hit the high street, too, so 
you'll be able to spend anything from £30 at H&M for a grey wool-mix A-line to 
£199 for a black button-front wool skirt at Jaeger. I'm relieved that hemlines 
have headed south, too. This season, we can finally leave the babydoll look 
behind and dress as if we're lady-like grown-ups again.

Q I'm going on holiday at the end of August. I hate lugging full-size bottles 
of toiletries away with me - they always take up so much room in my case. What 
mini travel kits can you recommend?
Rita

A I'd recommend Bliss Sink Side Six Pack (£20), which contains shampoo, 
conditioner, face wash, body butter and soap. And I'm an avid fan of Liz Earle 
products. Her Try Me mini essentials kit (£17) contains cleanser, moisturiser 
and skin tonic. If you want to take some toiletries on to the plane with you, 
the This Works travel set, £35, contains a variety of products to help you 
fight off the dehydrating effects of flying, including a refreshing facial 
spray and a calming aromatherapy inhaler. If you have some favourite products 
at home that you want to use on your trip, then why not pop into Muji? This 
store produces a great range of small-size bottles - not only can you decant 
your regular toiletries into these, but they are also reusable.

·  If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
