
Of course, now that I’ve joined, I wish I’d done it ages ago, but you 
definitely should: it’s wonderful to keep up with what the grandchildren are up 
to and to see all their funny photos, though for some reason my stupid pooter 
won’t let me see all of them.

Trying to look like fish seems to be the “in” thing, though why they do it in 
their underwear, heaven knows. And they write such funny things. Do you have 
any idea what Hella Bamf Yo means? Nor did I, but Pandora says it is short for 
hello best and marvellous friend and yo – sorry, senior moment – I think that’s 
short for yolo, like carpe diem. But it’s a very sweet thought, so I put it at 
the top of myFacebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> page, 
under a photograph of the bowling club.

No, it’s odd, none of them friended me back, but with Facebook you make new 
pen pals all the time. It’s really sick in that respect: that’s what the young 
say for “marvellous”. Without Facebooking, I don’t think I’d understand a word 
they say, fo shizzleton. Anyway, there are so many military types – I’ve been 
Facebooking with a very handsome American widower who bears the very highest 
honours, but the poor chap’s been pensioned off for shell shock without a 
penny, true dat. He’s very complimentary about some of my selfies – actually, 
I’m rather wishing he’d go away. I keep telling him all my spare cash goes to 
Barnado’s and I don’t want to remarry. So what with the endless advertisements 
for incontinence pads – quite uncalled for, lord knows what the young make of 
it – I’m starting to focus more on my Twittering.

Related: Modern tribes: the wood lover 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/28/modern-tribes-woodburner-bore-catherine-bennett>

Well, it’s such fun, just showing off and gossip, really – like the bowling 
club, if we were more interested in cats. But my goodness, the anger. At one 
point I had to tweet hella bamf yo to try to calm everyone down. You wouldn’t 
believe the abuse, so childish. Someone even said bamf means bad ass 
motherfucker. I’d go back to Facebook, but when you’re retired, you just don’t 
have the time, do you?
