
For once, the timing couldn't have been better. It wasn't just, as Clare Short 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/clareshort> points out, that the Chilcot 
inquiry gave her a full three hours, "so I could say the whole thing"; it was 
also that she's standing down at the next election, and "it felt really good to 
go out and sit there and say my piece, put it on the record," before she leaves.

And say it she did, with demotic directness: Tony Blair had conned her. The 
attorney general misled the cabinet – which, in any case, consisted of informal 
cups of coffee, rubber-stamping, and backbiting. The idea that she might be 
sending people into an illegal situation had "thrown her into a tizz". Britain 
should be ashamed of its behaviour, and the special relationship urgently 
needed to be rethought. It was a potent brew of inside information, scornful 
conviction, and plain speaking, and at the end, for only the second time in the 
last nine weeks, the audience clapped.

How was that? I ask, in her office on the ground floor of Portcullis House, 
the next day. "It was nice – but I wasn't playing for that." She's had 
"hundreds of extremely nice emails," she says, and has been congratulated in 
the street – but she knows that there were also those who said, "Oh, it's Clare 
Short mouthing off again. Who listens to her?" And when she came back to 
parliament? "Well, for quite a long time the very New Labour New Labour people 
have averted their gaze when I've walked past. I'm not a paranoid person, but I 
think there was a bit more of that yesterday."

Settling into an armchair, she averts her own eyes, addressing the window, and 
the Thames. Perhaps because she turns out, in person, to have an unexpected 
sense of mischief, and a sudden, warm smile, the chewed-up, 
Birmingham-truculent voice and the battle-ready face feel far less dominant 
than on TV.

Short had already attracted outraged opinion before her decision not to resign 
on the eve of the Iraq war – her brusque dismissal of volcano-stricken 
Montserratians who would be "wanting golden elephants next" comes to mind – but 
that was nothing compared to what she has been subjected to since. This is 
partly because she seemed to have such principled objections, and, as the 
well-respected founding leader of the Department for International Development, 
seemed such a positive force in the world: fighting debt relief and driving 
development up the agenda.

Two letters, addressed to Blair on 14 February and 5 March 2003, and 
declassified this week, only underline the misgivings she had to swallow by 
staying; they also have a prophetic ring. "Situation of the Iraqi people 
already extremely fragile. Any disruption could lead to a humanitarian 
catastrophe," begins the first. "Explicit UN mandate essential for the UN and 
others to legally engage on the reconstruction of Iraq," says the second. On 9 
March 2003, she was asked by the BBC whether she would resign if there was a 
war without a UN mandate. "Oh, absolutely," she answered. "There's no question 
about that." On 17 March Robin Cook resigned, to applause in the house. She did 
not.

Why? "I've explained this 10,000 times! Do you want me to do it all again?" I 
wait, and so she does, sing-songing with exasperation – Blair calling her in, 
persuading her personally, promising a) a second resolution, b) the publishing 
of a Middle East road map, c) a UN lead on the reconstruction of Iraq. "I got 
lots of flack, but I still think that if those things had been done, the Middle 
East would be in a totally different place! And then it became apparent, after 
not very long, that he was just manipulating. And that's the story. And I'm not 
ashamed of it. I mean, if I'd just wanted to be popular, I just would have 
gone. I WISH he hadn't conned me. I WISH he'd really meant it, but goodness 
knows, he is persuasive – and you DON'T want, in the teeth of a war, to believe 
your prime minister is simply manipulating you."

It is heartfelt, and believable – both in ways she intends, and in ways she 
presumably doesn't, because there is an entirely human vanity in it too. Blair, 
caught between the American juggernaut and her entirely reasonable objections, 
flattered her sense of doing good, of changing the world, to get her to stay 
onside. And she fell for it –which accounts for the note of distinctly personal 
betrayal. She has more in common with Blair, too, than she thinks – in her 
Chilcot appearance it was striking how blame and perfidy and mistakes lie 
anywhere but at her door. Her particular problem is that history has proved her 
instincts right, but it has also, in the form of her failure to resign earlier, 
robbed her of the moral high ground: in the coercive public narrative of these 
things, something more complicated than blame is required.

Also striking, however, is her real belief, born of a 1960s childhood, of 
coming to power in a shortlived window between the cold war and the "war on 
terror", that large-scale changes for the good were possible, and that she 
could help bring them about. It seems rather naive now, but also rather moving.

Short traces much of what she is to her upbringing – the second of seven 
children born to a Catholic schoolteacher father from County Armagh. He was a 
radical critic of establishment and sympathetic to those on the receiving end 
of British imperial instincts. In an era of signs that read "No blacks no 
coloureds no Irish" she recalls him chastising other Irish people who made 
racist comments, and going to the aid of pupils' families made homeless by slum 
landlord Peter Rachman.

Her mother was "potato-famine Irish," from the poor area of Birmingham in 
which Short grew up, and a "very committed Catholic – a generous, liberation 
theology-type Catholic." Until she was 14 or so Clare was just as devout, going 
to mass each morning, joining the Legion of Mary, visiting old ladies.

"You had to work out what was right and wrong, you had to try and be a good 
person, if you behaved wrongly and were truly sorry you could be forgiven. 
It made you more than just a selfish greedy little person."

Although Catholic teaching on contraception, for example, soon left her cold, 
those instincts remained, and "I put all that moral yearning and [need for] 
belonging to something structured into the Labour party. From the 1970s on, it 
was my core moral thing". When, in 2006, she finally resigned the Labour whip, 
it was this aspect that crossed her mind. "I thought, 'Oh no! I'm going to 
lapse again'!"

She was shaped, too, by her large family. "It's very hard on mum, giving birth 
to and taking care of all these people. But this turbulent, argumentative, 
loving, honest way of being was how we grew up." Then again, "Do you remember 
[Aldous Huxley's] Brave New World? And there was some chap in it where Huxley 
wrote that they'd put too much alcohol in his test tube? And he was a bit – 
broke the rules, do you remember? I used to say it as a joke. I think there was 
a bit too much alcohol in my test tube."

Her combination of self-belief and iconoclasm was evident as soon as she 
joined the house, 27 years ago. Nine days later, according to a recent Archive 
on 4, a BBC reporter asked her what she had made of the investiture of the new 
Speaker. "It's silly," she replied. "I found it embarrassing and I actually 
left. I thought afterwards maybe I should have had more humility. But it was 
long-winded, and I had a lot to do." A couple of weeks later she stood up in 
the Commons and suggested that Alan Clark, then defence minister, was drunk at 
the dispatch box.

"It's quite extraordinary that I ended up in the cabinet," she says now, 
"because I've always gone on like I go on. But I'm hard-working, and I'm not 
stupid, and I do mean it. And I'd stand for election and people would vote for 
me, for those reasons. In opposition, we elected the shadow cabinet. And we 
used to elect the national executive in an open election. And then in 
government, the prime minister appoints. I would never have got appointed in 
government. The kind of people who get promoted now the party's in power are 
a different kind of people."

When she was elected as MP, at the Labour nadir of 1983, only 23 out of 650 
MPs were women. "The hours went late, and if anyone said breast cancer they'd 
all giggle, you know." She laughs. "But they're so silly that I must say I 
never found them intimidating."

She says she found the media more hurtful: the comments about her appearance; 
the backlash against her campaign to end Page Three; an incident where the News 
of the World trawled through her private life, looking for evidence of a 
criminal boyfriend. And the boyfriend existed? "Oh yes, he existed. So you've 
got it all. I mean, the Serious Crime Squad were powerful and very deviant – it 
was pretty scary." She laughs again. "I didn't sleep for a bit and lost weight 
and all that."

There was a radical change of tone when, in October 1996, she announced that 
she had been reunited with the son she had given up for adoption 31 years 
previously. Becoming pregnant at 18, she did what many Catholic girls would 
have done and gave the baby up for adoption ("When they came to take him it was 
terrible," she said once. "It's been terrible ever since.") She married the 
boy's father, but the marriage didn't last. The fact that when her son came 
looking for her, her second husband had just died after years of struggling 
with Alzheimer's, gave the event added poignancy. When she made her official 
announcement to the press, even passing lorry drivers shouted good luck.

She was at one point linked to Mo Mowlam's widower, but she is single now. 
When I ask what price she has paid for her commitment to politics she answers: 
"I was going to say a family, but then I was the one who was with my mum. Of 
that seven. My dad and mum came to live with me when he was ill and then he 
died in my house [her mother died two years ago] – and then of course, my own 
children thing … that is so peculiar."

When Short finally resigned from cabinet, two months after the war began, it 
was her third resignation from office on a point of principle. "Loyalty is a 
good quality," she says, "but loyalty to something that's wrong is not good." 
Moreover, she argues, loyalty to a party as she understands it no longer 
exists. "The way you band people together to get loyalty is to let everyone 
have a fair stab at speaking and arguing, and then vote. The excuse now is a 
divided party will never win, you can't have arguments, it'll be in the media. 
Something profound is lost."

She thinks the only way to get it back is if we get a hung parliament in the 
next election. "Power will flow back to the Commons, and flow back to the 
cabinet. I think that will be much healthier."

When she resigned, on that day in 2003, how did it feel? Calling Blair was 
tricky, she says, and there were tears when she left her department. "But this 
pulling away – all these people who had been, 'Please, will you come to my 
constituency and speak at this dinner, please Clare, please,' suddenly averting 
their eyes as they passed you in the ­corridor was a bit of a shock. So I was 
very much … alone. And I'm quite a social person.

"And then I thought I'd make speeches in the Commons, and join up with people 
who shared the critique, and we might be able to rescue the Labour party, the 
same at the Labour party conference – but I found that the poor old Labour 
party, most of its democracy had been crushed. So that was my first instinct – 
that good people would gather together and sort things out. But that, sadly, 
could not be."

I suggest that people often feel completely confounded when they lose 
something so absorbing; so much of their selves are bound up in what they do – 
"actually, I'm feeling thatnow," says Short. "Because then, I had my 
constituency. Which is needy. I'm conscious that that will go. And in a way 
it's a ­burden, and in another way it's ameaning. Even in the worst of times 
politically you're still doing something human that matters."

Short shrift

"I read in the newspaper that one is not allowed in this house to accuse 
another member of not being sober. But I very seriously put it to you that the 
minister [Alan Clark] is … incapable, and it is a disrespect to this house and 
the office he holds."20 July 1983 
"Having met all those ministers and MPs in the civil service, I knew they had 
feet of clay. If they could do it, I could do it. Better."26 September 1990

"Most of us women like men; it's just that we find them a constant 
disappointment."January 1990

"[Blair] came along as a fresh, young, principled and decent man and some 
people are trying to turn him into macho man. I know they are doing it ­because 
they think it is the way to win, but I think they're making the wrong judgment 
and they endanger our victory." 8 August 1996

"No children. I regret it, greatly. Certainly when I was 35-36 and all that 
biological time clock I was very upset about it … Now I'm 46 and more used to 
it I'm sort of OK – I'm willing to talk about it because there are so many 
women out there who are hurting … But there's life after not having ­children."
To Sue Lawley, July 1992

"We are at the moment happier than we have been in our lives. It is more 
wonderful than anyone can imagine … It is like falling in love, but less 
complicated. And it is guaranteed to last forever."Joint statement with her 
son, October 1996

"I am sad and sorry that it has ended like this." Resignation letter 2003

"This is not a Labour government. And I have no confidence in it. The right 
thing to do is ­resign the whip and sit as an independent ­Labour MP.

22 October 2006
