
It’s just your average Monday morning at Morden Baptist Church in south-west 
London, and people aged 65 plus are arriving for exercise classes designed for 
those who are risk of falling.

Falls are a major public health problem and the most common cause of death 
from injury in over 65s. The King’s Fund estimates that falls account for 40% 
of all ambulance call outs, and are a major cause of older people being 
admitted to hospital. It puts the cost of falls to the England’sNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> at £2bn a year.

The Morden classes – addressing muscle deterioration, particularly in legs and 
ankles – have been running for a year. They are commissioned byMerton clinical 
commissioning group <http://www.mertonccg.nhs.uk/Pages/default.aspx> from 
Central London community healthcare NHS trust’s <http://www.clch.nhs.uk/> falls 
prevention service and were set up by service lead Stephanie Bruggemann.

“The borough has gone from having exercise classes which were one size fits 
all with about 20 people coming and only one freelance instructor, to 
outcome-measured, ability-graded sessions which include a health advice 
component, and are entirely aimed at preventing falls,” says Bruggemann.

Feedback from class participants is impressive. Out of nearly 100 people who 
responded to questionnaires, 90% reported that their walking had improved, 80% 
said their balance was better, 90.6% said they had more stamina and 86% felt 
more confident.

And data from the service shows that the rate of hip fractures in people aged 
over 65 is significantly lower in Merton (357 per 100,000) than in England 
overall, where it is 451 per 100,000.

Sara Ryder Owen, a specialist physiotherapist with the service, believes 
tailored exercise is crucial to patients’ welfare and independence: “We are 
giving people an opportunity to stay active and give them back their 
confidence. Often when people fall people they become very fearful and that has 
a knock-on effect. They go out less, become isolated, stop doing things they 
enjoy, and they become less mobile and this results in other complications.”

Older people <https://www.theguardian.com/society/older-people> make up 12.3% 
of Merton’s population, but the proportion of over 65s is predicted to grow by 
14.7% over the next 10 years, presenting an increasing demand for health and 
social care services. But it is difficult to know the exact number of falls 
that occur in Merton because many go unreported and data is captured across 
different health and social care systems. In some cases, only the injury and 
not the fall is recorded.

Related: Are community services meeting older people's health needs? Live 
discussion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/14/are-community-services-meeting-older-peoples-health-needs-live-discussion>

Merton falls prevention service starts by identifying those at risk. People 
are unable to self-refer, but Bruggemann says the trust and commissioners are 
looking to address this.

“Patients are referred by GPs, rehabilitation services, and colleagues who 
work with people who are 65 and older, such as such as speech and language 
therapists, occupational therapists, podiatrists and staff from the London 
ambulance service,” she says.

What follows is an assessment by a physiotherapist in the patient’s home. Sara 
Ryder Owen, a specialist physiotherapist with the service, explains: “We 
usually have one assessment to cover the whole picture, asking people about 
their health, looking at their balance. It’s very much patient led, so finding 
out what they would like to achieve or what they would like to get back to 
doing.


“And then setting up a treatment plan, referring them to an exercise 
programme, which can be done in a class or at home, and maybe referring them to 
a treatment pathway, if that’s appropriate. We may go back to reassess them or 
provide a walking aid.”

Ryder Owen emphasises how important it is to work with other agencies, saying 
that the team often does follow up visits with health professionals from other 
services, including Julia Russell, the lead nurse for Merton’s community 
prevention of admissions team.

Related: Innovative community health services help ease the pressure on GPs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/apr/13/innovative-community-health-services-ease-pressure-gps>

“It’s really if the risk of falling is medical, where my intervention is 
required,” says Russell. “I will go out to that patient, usually with a 
physiotherapist, so identifying if they have underlying issues such as high 
blood pressure or an infection. I can address that situation. If there’s an 
infection, for example, I can prescribe medication.”


Meanwhile the team works with other organisations to “case find” those who 
would benefit from its services. It has a project with the London fire service 
so that officers can do a simple falls screen when they are fitting smoke 
alarms in homes. Poor eye sight can affect balance, so it is about to start a 
project with Merton Vision, whereby the charity will develop a simple test to 
be delivered by the falls prevention team to identify if patients need an eye 
examination.

One problem, according to Bruggemann, is that it takes time to build working 
relationships with other services which break down if contacts leave. “A good 
example would be the fracture liaison service in the fact that their nurse 
moved on and there was a gap of three months before someone else was in post. 
That’s why sometimes it doesn’t go as smoothly as we would like.”

Education is a vital part of the falls service. In addition to health advice 
delivered at the Morden exercise classes, it means educating the public about 
the risk of falls through community organisations or housing associations.


Russell believes the falls prevention service is absolutely vital, and should 
be introduced nationally. “We’ve got a huge problem with people falling, the 
knock on effects are considerable, but this service is stopping that.”

Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
