
I am sticking pictures, 30 of them, into my daughter's yearbook. It takes a 
whole glue stick, and I am desperate to make everything line up because Tilly 
will be scathing if it's a mess. It's her final year at primary school and 
though it's yet more Americanisation of her childhood, the yearbook is lovely. 
The girls are all smiling over their shoulders at the camera, the boys are 
trying to look cool. Next to their pictures is a list of their likes, dislikes, 
best and worst times at school and their aspirations. Everyone dislikes Justin 
Bieber. Everyone wants to be an actor or a pop star. No one says they want to 
be a teacher or scientist. Perhaps they know how much it costs to go to 
university.

We mothers feel it's the end of an era, even if we have been through this 
before. Fortunately, there are enough leaving events to satisfy even the most 
sentimental of parents. There's the kids' day out kayaking, the leavers' 
service, the leavers' show, and the disco on the last day of term. It's 
obligatory for parents to cry during the leavers' service and for the girls to 
wail uncontrollably at the disco. There's also a parents' night out where I am 
sure that after a couple of glasses of wine I, like the girls, will sob and 
swear to keep in touch for ever.

As we stick the pictures in, I am hampered not only by my cheap off-the-shelf 
glasses but by having baby Flora on one knee. As her main food source, I still 
rarely leave her. One of the mothers points out that I will be doing this 
sticking business again for Flora in 11 years' time. "If they make glasses 
strong enough," I say.

Eleven years will take me to 2021. It hits me suddenly that I am living a 
Groundhog Day life, doing the same things over and over again. I will be 
standing in the same playground (although primary schools are so oversubscribed 
in our area that this is not a given), talking to different mothers about the 
same things, for ever. I will have been dropping off and meeting my children 
(work permitting) at primary schools for nearly 30 years. Other parents will 
have moved on to other phases of their lives. I will be sticking pictures into 
yearbooks until they wheel me into an old people's home. Yet, strangely, I have 
rarely been happier. On a good day I think I might finally be getting the hang 
of motherhood.

Except that all of the end-of-term events are more challenging with a baby in 
tow. Flora is an easy baby, but even she has to learn to use her voice, and a 
day before the leavers' show – Peter Pan – she discovers squawking. Loudly.

I get her to sleep just before the show starts by feeding her and jiggling her 
around in her pushchair. The show is being filmed, and I don't want Flora to 
ruin Tilly's appearance by making a noise.

As it is, I've made a mistake and told J the show starts at 6.15pm instead of 
6pm. Luckily, Tilly is sharing her part with another girl and only comes on in 
the second half. Flora sleeps through the first half and wakes as soon as Tilly 
comes on. She starts squawking immediately. I try to breastfeed her into 
silence, but she pulls herself off, exposing my right breast to most of the 
parents. I shouldn't feel mortified, but I do.

J and I take it in turns to push Flora round the playground and dash in to 
watch the show. Afterwards we tell Tilly how well she did, but she isn't 
interested. "It's Flora who did well," she says, putting her face close to the 
baby's. "Tilly heard you, Flora. Clever Flora for learning to squawk." I guess 
it's too much to hope that by the leavers' service, Flora will have advanced to 
gurgling. Softly.
