
Q I bought a dress recently - it's very Fifties prom, and I love it. But it's 
so silver and glittery I'm at a loss as to what accessories to wear with it. My 
friends have suggested black tights and black jewellery, but I'm afraid it will 
look too gothic. Any ideas on what goes with silver?
Mimi

A There might only be a shade in it, but why not opt for grey tights? Try a 
mid-grey, non-shiny opaque pair (such as Pretty Polly grey winter cotton, £6) 
or charcoal woollens (Falke's soft merino-wool ribbed tights in anthracite, 
£20), both frommytights.com <http://www.mytights.com>. The wool would be a nice 
modern touch and contrast a different texture to the glitter of your dress. 
Finish off with a charcoal-grey patent shoe or a dove-grey Christian Louboutin 
pump (fromnet-a-porter.com <http://www.net-a-porter.com)>). This will mean you 
look more ice queen than gothic maiden.

Q I'm in my thirties and in desperate need of a wardrobe makeover. My clothes 
are dowdy, and I feel I've nothing special or exciting to wear, or even things 
I could keep as basics. Money is tight, as I'm buying a house. Do you have any 
advice?
Veronique

A Be brutal. First, throw out anything you no longer wear. If you can't bear 
to part with certain items and think you may wear them again, then vacuum-pack 
and store them. If you're like me, in a year you probably won't have touched 
them and will finally pass them on to a charity shop. While you're clearing 
out, you'll undoubtedly find a few surprises which may give you something to 
build on. Second, take advantage of the Christmas season and ask for clothes as 
presents - but make sure you're precise about what you want. Finally, head to 
the shops. Set a budget - you can do a lot with £150 on the high street - and 
have a clear idea of what you want. If it's trend-led pieces, look for a great 
jumper or an embellished top (if purple suits you, it's a key colour this 
season). This will work with jeans or with a skirt for the evening. Search for 
a short jacket (like the Marks & Spencer two-button swing jacket, £59, right) on
marksandspencer.com <http://www.marksandspencer.com>. If you pick up on these 
simple but versatile trends, your wardrobe will soon be as good as new....

· If you have a question for Jo Jones, email her at ask.jo@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
