
Teachers and other staff at some independent faith schools are being 
segregated by gender, the chief inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw, has
said in a letter to the education secretary 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sir-michael-wilshaw-letter-about-segregation-in-independent-faith-schools>
.

In one case, staff at Rabia girls and boys school in Luton were segregated 
during whole-school training, with men in one room while the session was 
broadcast to women in a separate part of the school.

In a separate incident, the school insisted on segregating male and female 
staff using a dividing screen across the middle of the room during an initial 
meeting with inspectors from the schools watchdog,Ofsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>.

“This meeting was not carried out in a religious setting, but in a classroom,” 
said Wilshaw, who warned that such segregation flouts therequirement to promote 
fundamental British values 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/27/schools-england-promote-british-values>
 in schools.

Rabia is a Muslim day school with 160 pupils. It has received a series of 
adverse Ofsted judgments. Last year, the school was criticised for treating 
boys and girls differently,limiting girls to sewing and knitting 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-beds-bucks-herts-31452814> in design and 
technology classes.

The latest inspection, which took place earlier in April, described the school 
once again as “inadequate”, although inspectors said there had been some 
progress elsewhere in response to earlier inspections.

Wilshaw first wrote to Nicky Morgan, the education secretary, on the issue of 
segregation of staff and governors at independent faith schools in November, 
but emergency follow-up inspections of three independent faith schools earlier 
this month showed that the practice was still occurring.

He urged Morgan to review the Department for Education guidance introduced in 
2014 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/promoting-fundamental-british-values-through-smsc>
 and, if necessary, write to the proprietors of independent faith schools to 
clarify government expectations and commitment to the promotion of British 
values.

“This sort of behaviour manifested by the leaders of this school clearly does 
not conform to the spirit of the equalities legislation which underpins the 
spiritual, moral, social and cultural standard,” Wilshaw wrote.

He said he believed that standards relating to fundamental British values were 
being actively undermined by some leaders, proprietors and governors in 
independent schools. “Any form of segregation, without a good educational 
reason, is likely to lead to an inadequate inspection judgment for leadership 
and management,” Wilshaw said.

Rabia school was contacted for a response but there was no immediate comment.

The Department for Education said the Rabia case had been referred to the 
Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC). A spokesperson said: “It is 
completely unacceptable for women to be treated less favourably than men, and 
the advice note we have received from Ofsted on Rabia Girls’ and Boys’ School 
is extremely concerning.

“We have referred this case to the EHRC so they can consider whether the 
school has breached the Equalities Act, and we will consider carefully the 
inspection report on the school to determine what action to take against any 
potential breaches in the independent school standards.”

