
Having paid due attention to the Black Isle Brewery, about which I wrote the 
other week, I continued my easy progress around the area. This is rolling, 
verdant country, with thick hedges, fields of wheat and barley, long rows of 
potatoes and frothy woods. The farms are small, the cattle fat and glossy, the 
sheep chunky and woolly. No one seems to know why the Black Isle is called the 
Black Isle. Some say it has a dark past steeped in witchcraft, others that it 
is so named because the soil is black, which it isn't - it's fine and reddish, 
like that of the Eden valley in Cumberland, and just as fertile.

I tumbled into Black Isle Berries, aka Ryefield Farm, the empire of Torquil 
Fraser, a tall man whose diffident manner disguises his passion for fruit. On 
60 or so acres, he grows not only berries - raspberries, for which Scotland 
rightly claims pre-eminence, strawberries of extraordinary sweetness, 
blueberries, gooseberries and uncountable currants, all pick-your-own - but 
also apples, cherries and plums. And vegetables, Fraser assured me, when the 
summer veg finally get started - then the shop would be crowded with tomatoes, 
courgettes, artichokes, beetroot, cucumbers, lettuce and herbs. It isn't easy, 
said Fraser, running a small fruit farm in this day and age. He's always 
experimenting, too, trying out different varieties, using insect predators to 
wipe out insect problems, and now producing his own apple juice. "I have to do 
it," he said. "This is an unsubsidised little place, so we always have to offer 
a bit more."

At Eilean Dubh in Fortrose, I lunched on a salad incorporating very fresh, 
fat, local scallops and excellent black pudding, followed by a hunger-stomping 
clapshot - a thick stew of swede and potatoes beefed up, in this case, with 
decent chunks of, er, beef. It was filling and wholesome, and I almost had to 
have a lie-down afterwards, but no, it was on, on, on to Easter Balmungie Farm, 
which peers out over the Moray Firth. My attention had been drawn to it by a 
note on the admirable Highlands & Islands Local Food Networks website, saying 
it was a haven for the irresistibly named and rare Scots Dumpy hen.

It turned out that the farm wasn't just a haven for the Scots Dumpy hen, but 
also for the almost equally rare Shetland cattle, the slightly less rare 
Shetland sheep and the unrare Tamworth pig, all of them the charges of Anne and 
John Chance. The Scots Dumpy hen, which looks like a tug, had traditionally 
been the Scottish farmyard hen, Anne told me. "It's such a shame that these old 
breeds are disappearing," she said. "Modern farming seems to be losing out on 
quality and character by its insistence on productivity and size" - as has 
happened with so many animals that once characterised the different regions of 
these islands.

I don't know what it is about Scotland, but it seems to bring out a selfless 
dedication in some people. Bob and Helen Bull migrated all the way from 
Plymouth to set up the Glachbeg Croft Education Centre to teach children and 
adults with emotional difficulties and disabilities through looking after five 
cattle, 15 sheep, numberless guinea pigs and free-ranging chickens on their 14 
acres, as well as cooking the fruit and vegetable from their fecund patch. 
Sadly, I haven't enough space here to more than touch on all the various 
activities the Bulls carry on, but you can buy their surplus eggs from the 
croft gate and get on the distribution list for the meat when they send an 
animal for slaughter. "We're driven by a passion for what we do," Bob said.

And although they might not put it in quite such blunt terms, that would serve 
as a motto for all the producers I met on the Black Isle.

Where to get it

Black Isle Berries Ryefield Farm, Tore, Muir of Ord, Ross-shire, 01463 811276, 
blackisleberries.co.uk <http://www.blackisleberries.co.uk>
Eilean Dubh 18 High Street, Fortrose, Ross-shire, 01381 620690
Easter Balmungie Farm Eathie Road, Fortrose, Ross & Cromarty, 01381 621006
Glachbeg Croft Education Centre Allanglach Wood, North Kessock, Inverness, 
01463 811923,glachbeg.org.uk <http://www.glachbeg.org.uk>
