
Distance 3 miles (4.8km)
Classification Easy
Duration 1 hour 30 minutes
Begins Minnowburn car park
OS grid reference J327685

Walk in a nutshell
Historic woodland, ancient monuments, rare wildlife and spectacular views 
across the Lagan valley: all in Belfast, and covered by a short and generally 
well-surfaced circuit. You will cross farmland, and may encounter grazing 
livestock so, although dogs are certainly welcome, they must be kept under 
control, especially in Sandpit Field.

Why it's special
The Giant's Ring would be impressive anywhere, but finding it without even 
leaving Belfast is remarkable. It is an enormous earthwork henge, roughly 180m 
across, with a stone passage tomb at its centre. The whole construction is 
thought to be more than 4,000 years old, and has had some sort of public use 
throughout its history. Nearby, there is Shaw's bridge, a crossing that also 
dates back to the stone age. The bridge you see today was built in 1709.

Keep your eyes peeled for
Spawning salmon or sea trout, kingfishers or dippers, or even an otter or a 
seal in the river. The Minnowburn woodlands are a marvel in themselves, with 
the stupendous Minnowburn beeches that tower over the Ballylesson Road 
and produce an interesting array of fungi in the autumn. Among the more 
recently planted sections are the Belvoir oaks, which were planted with acorns 
from the Belvoir forest, maintaining a direct link with Ireland's ancient trees.

Recover afterwards
Across Shaw's bridge there is the beautiful and very reasonable Barnett 
restaurant <http://www.belfastcity.gov.uk/malonehouse/barnett.asp> at Malone 
House, open for lunch from 12pm to 3.30pm every day. Or, in the Malone Room in 
the same building, you can get snacks and light meals until 4.30pm. Otherwise, 
try the excellent seasonal menus atLily's Pub and Eatery 
<http://www.lilysbelfast.com/> over on Lisburn Road. If you're there on a 
weekend afternoon, you might even catch some live music.

If it's tipping down
There are three superb places to visit just 2.5 miles (4km) up Malone Road. 
The Naughton Gallery <http://www.naughtongallery.org> at Queen's University 
displays a mixture of mostly modern art, including pieces from its own 
collection and touring shows. TheBotanic Gardens 
<http://www.belfastcity.gov.uk/parksandopenspaces/parks/botanicgardens.asphttp://>
, though largely outdoors, are home to the Palm House and the Tropical Ravine, 
two large buildings filled with rare and extraordinary plants. And, of course, 
there is theUlster Museum <http://www.nmni.com>, which houses a diverse 
collection of art and artefacts, including many relics from prehistoric Ireland.

How to get there
From the Europa bus station in the centre of Belfast, take either routes 13D 
or 513 and stop at Shaw's bridge.



 <>Step by step

1 From the car park, follow the Lagan riverbank path upstream. After about 
200m, take the first path you come to on the left-hand side.

2 Follow this path, cross Edenderry Road and continue with the mature woodland 
on your left. You'll enter young, broadleaved woodland. Carry on until you 
reach Ballynahatty Road. Cross the road and take the path opposite.

3 Follow the path that has fields on either side for about half a mile, until 
you reach the Giant's Ring. Make your way out through the gate at the opposite 
side from which you arrived. Pass through the car park and carry on down the 
avenue until you reach the road.

4 Cross the road, taking care to watch out for traffic, and climb over the 
stile opposite. You're now in the Sandpit Field, a natural amphitheatre that 
was carved by retreating glaziers during the last ice age. Follow the track 
around the top of the big pit until you come to a stile beside a road.

5 Climb over the stile and cross the road. Go through the pedestrian gate 
opposite, follow the path through a second gate and continue on the old tarmac 
path up Terrace Hill. Carry on until you reach the rose garden. Go back the way 
you came and take the path on the left, leading downhill through a young 
woodland.

6 Follow the path until you reach the Minnowburn river; here you'll walk along 
the banks of the river downstream until you reach Minnowburn bridge and the car 
park beyond.
