
NowThis is built for distribution. It wears its costs lightly – small team, 
little investment in capital-intensive technology, no legacy infrastructure – 
and just under two years ago it effectively shut down its desktop presence. 
“Homepage. Even the word sounds old,” is the message that greets visitors on a 
page now intent on sending them elsewhere. Today, the short form videos NowThis 
produces generate 1.6bn views per month on other people’s platforms. Revenue is 
shared accordingly.

Where once publishers used social media as a promotional tool to pull users 
back to their own websites, now social networks and messaging apps have morphed 
into content hosts – think Facebook Instant Articles, Snapchat Discover, Apple 
News, LinkedIn Pulse, Google AMP and, even, Twitter Moments. “Where others saw 
this trend as a threat, we saw it as an opportunity,” Athan Stephanopoulos, 
president of NowThis told an audience at theReuters Tomorrow’s News 
<https://www.facebook.com/ReutersUK/videos/vb.208314602512037/1246203175389836/?type=2&theater>
 panel discussion in London earlier this month.

This new model begs a few questions, not least about economic sustainability. 
Speaking at the same event, the Guardian’s executive editor of digital Aron 
Pilhofer said: “There is the world we wish existed and then there is the world 
that exists. And the world that exists is one that is increasingly distributed 
and disintermediated. We can either ignore that and pretend that we can create 
a destination-oriented business as if it’s 1996 or we can engage with it.”

It’s a pragmatic response from a legacy publisher. There are other questions 
too, like how to rethink reader relationships on platforms owned and controlled 
by others. These are platforms where established publishers compete with a 
multitude of other sources (some good, some bad) invariably sharing the same or 
similar content.

“That’s a huge challenge,” acknowledged Nathalie Malinarich, mobile editor at 
BBC News online. “When you look at yourFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> feed, after half an hour 
you’ve no idea where the news came from ... The key is to find your own voice 
and to find your own stories.” For the BBC, establishing its own voice is about 
impartiality and trust. “That’s a really important thing in an area of 
distributed content. Who do you trust?”

Echoing Malinarich, Google’s head of strategic news and publisher partnerships 
Eero Korhonen contrasted the tacit trust a reader held for a newspaper with the 
relationship a user now has with a data-driven social platform. “They forgave 
the paper on the days it didn’t give them the news they wanted or didn’t 
surprise them because on average the paper delivered,” Korhonen said. “The 
algorithm doesn’t know which content to trust.”

So how do you engender trust in an era of distributed content? For Malinarich 
it’s about first principles and transparency. “When I talk about trust, I’m 
talking about editorial standards,” she said. “You have trusted [the news 
outlet] to have checked the story, that they are telling you what they know and 
what they don’t know. [It’s also about] attribution – if you got it from 
somewhere else, say so.”

For Mark Challinor, president of the International News Media Association, 
trust is about acknowledging that if future revenue models are predicated on 
highly sought-after reader data, then “we need to convince users that in return 
for giving information to us about themselves, we are going to give them a 
quality service.”

Similarly for NowThis, trust is about a contract with the user to deliver 
relevant, interesting and entertaining content. “When somebody likes your page 
they are essentially giving you authority to enter their news feed. So you have 
a certain level of responsibility,” Stephanopoulos told the Reuters audience.

And what about an algorithmic solution? The Trust Project 
<http://www.thetrustproject.org/>, set up with initial funding from Craigslist 
founder Craig Newmark, is hoping that technology “can bake the evidence of 
trustworthy reporting – accuracy, transparency and inclusion – plainly into 
news practices, tools and platforms.” When the project shared an initial set of 
practical tactics, academic and author Jeff Jarvis jumped in witha series of 
technology-led proposals of his own 
<https://medium.com/whither-news/building-trust-in-news-e85cfc07321f#.gbzsz9c02>
. His suggestions included rigorous citations through links, prioritising 
original work over rehashes and a corrections service that follows the reader. 
The idea is to create a series of signals that can help determine the rigour 
behind the story telling.

Jarvis created his wishlist in late 2014. Even though he was writing at a time 
before social distribution became the norm, many of his suggestions remain 
appropriate today. But perhaps some don’t. It’s doubtful, for example, that 
citations through links maps with attempts by Facebook et al to build something 
that resembles the AOL and Yahoo!-style walled gardens of 1990s. The hyperlink, 
unfortunately, appears incompatible with the grand plan of social distribution.

Content curation – combining data-driven filtering with human intervention – 
might be another route to create trust in, and ensure the provenance of, the 
journalism that gets most widely seen. But even this,as Facebook discovered 
last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/09/facebook-newsfeed-censor-conservative-news>
, is not without its risks. After all, social platforms might have technology 
baked in but they don’t yet have editorial standards, processes and instinct 
built in.

Jon Bernstein is an independent digital media consultant, editor and writer, 
formerly deputy editor, then digital director of New Statesman and multimedia 
editor at Channel 4 News. He tweets@jon_bernstein 
<https://twitter.com/Jon_Bernstein>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
