
If you’re a slave to the office, being able to shop for goods on the internet 
is ideal – except when you’re never in to take a delivery, and returns are too 
much hard work.

Two years ago Doddle set out to change all that by putting “click and commute” 
parcel collection points in train stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/18/network-rail-doddle-online-shoppers-pick-up-points>
, as well as other high-footfall locations. For office workers too busy to get 
to these stores, it thenintroduced its “Runners” 
<http://www.retailgazette.co.uk/blog/2015/08/doddles-team-of-runners-to-collect-parcels-from-where-the-consumer-is>
 who will come to wherever you are to pick up your parcel and send it.

Its latest innovation, Doddle Neighbour, which launched in February, is a 
logical extension of that – residents can opt for their homes to become pick-up 
points, in return for payment. People only need to go as far as a neighbour’s 
house to collect their parcels.

“It’s a professional take on something that happens anyway – leaving parcels 
with a neighbour if you’re out,” explains Tim Robinson, Doddle’s founder and 
CEO.

Neighbours make 50p per parcel. “For 20 hours’ availability per week handling 
lots of eBay parcels, this could add up to £6,000-7,000 a year,” he says. The 
arrangement could work for parents of young children, or retirees, who find 
themselves at home a lot – and can also earn £5 each time they recruit a new 
Doddle user.

Still in pilot phase, the scheme accounts for 50,000 of the 2.5m parcels 
Doddle expects to handle this year; 41 households are currently on board.

Under the new model, Doddle Neighbours collect parcels from a store for local 
residents. The company has packaged its store technology to run on a tablet, so 
the Neighbour service extends the same scanning and tracking facilities, along 
with a messaging platform allowing the customer and neighbour to liaise about 
the parcel handover.

Robinson, formerly managing director of Network Rail for Sussex, says: “The 
technology can do some amazing stuff. The unknown part is how this will go down 
with communities.”

According to Martin Newman, CEO and founder of e-commerce consultancy 
Practicology, financially compensating neighbours for handling other people’s 
parcels is a good thing, but comes with potential challenges. “One issue to 
consider is what this creates in terms of a contract or sense of responsibility 
for the neighbour,” he says. “Will they be obligated to stay in at certain 
times, or have insurance in case of break-in, for example?” Another area of 
concern, he adds “might be the scope for fraud – parcels going missing, for 
example. So all of that needs to be thought through.”

Isabel Fox, head of venture capital at White Cloud Capital, believes Doddle’s 
ability to scale up the scheme will be crucial. “Ensuring a strong network of 
‘neighbours’ in each area is essential as people don’t want to have to travel 
far to collect or drop off. The biggest challenge will be rolling out 
nationwide so there are plenty of local easy options, and ensuring a 
consistent, reliable and safe service to make it a sustainable new offering.”

Doddle isn’t the only company to have spotted the potential for last-mile 
logistics services: it’s a field that has seen plenty of innovation, from a DHL 
pilot where deliveries are madeto people’s car boots 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-32431301>, to smart mailboxes that take 
deliveries 
<http://www.gizmag.com/parcelhome-smart-box-package-delivery-pilot-belgium/37751/>
 and alert the consumer via an accompanying app.

But Doddle has found its niche where demand for convenience is highest. For 
retailers – Amazon, Asos, Warehouse, boohoo.com and Gap are among current 
partners – its services remove barriers to sales, such as unpredictable service 
and convoluted returns, as well as the cost of second-attempt deliveries. For 
carriers, it can make the last leg more cost- and time-efficient (and greener), 
reducing the number of stop points.

Set up as dedicated facilities (rather than a shared counter in a corner 
shop), Doddle hubs can process up to 3,000 parcels at a time, taking 90 seconds 
to retrieve an item from the in-store warehouse. Customers, Runners and 
Neighbours do the rest.

But are rising last-mile expectations sustainable? Robinson says consumers 
tend to get excited when something new comes to the market – for example 
Amazon’s one-hour delivery service, Prime Now. “It does up the level of 
expectation,” he says. “But that was a huge investment for Amazon, involving 
tens of depots around London. Other retailers don’t have that capacity.” 
Economy delivery, taking two to three days, still accounts for most shipments.

“After all, how urgently does someone really need a pair of jeans, and are 
they really going to pay a £6 premium to have them the same day?”

Doddle is looking for a new investor, having parted from Network Rail last 
year when it came under pressure to divest non-core activities. The business’s 
other investor, entrepreneur Lloyd Dorfman, bought out Network Rail’s share and 
has since been Doddle’s sole source of investment. The company now employs 400 
people and has raised £45m raised to date.

“It isn’t just about the money though,” Robinson says, of its ideal new 
investor. “A parcel carrier or logistics business would help broaden our 
reach.” The company is also exploring concession options with a leading grocer 
as well as a couple of high-street retailers; 2016 is expected to be the first 
billion-parcel year, and Doddle wants its share.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
