
I am a PhD student with publications ready to go and excellent feedback from 
my students. I am on track to finish within the time stipulated by my funding. 
So why do I feel like giving it all up? Because the reality of teaching in a 
university is becoming less and less appealing.

A major issue, before we even get to pay and working conditions, is the 
question of how teaching is allocated. The potential for institutional gender 
and race discrimination is immense. Most institutions operate on an entrenched 
system of direct patronage to determine teaching allocation – those who fit in 
get more of the “right kind” of teaching than those who don’t.

Related: Academics Anonymous: so many PhD students, so few jobs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/23/so-many-phd-students-so-few-jobs>

I have experienced this first-hand. In my first year I was offered just one 
class, while my male colleagues had, on average, three or four seminar groups. 
When I pointed this out to my head of department, I received a terrifying email 
suggesting that I had transgressed by contacting them, and that I was lucky to 
receive any offer of teaching at all.

This was followed up by a disciplinary meeting with my academic adviser, which 
surprised me because it had nothing to do with my research. I was told that I 
would receive no classes the next year. Ironically enough, last-minute staff 
changes meant that I was offered several courses and I now have a very heavy 
workload.

The pressure is enormous. I deliver four seminars a week, on the same course, 
for about £14 an hour. I get paid for one hour to prepare the seminar, and for 
each seminar, so that’s five hours.

I also do a lot of marking, for which I receive a lump sum that equates to one 
hour per student. That means I have 60 minutes to mark four short essays and 
one long essay for each student. That’s 7.5 minutes for each assignment, to 
leave 30 minutes for each 3,000-word essay. I also get paid for “student 
contact” (replying to emails and attending meetings), but this is calculated as 
five hours for the term – that’s about 12 minutes per student, over three 
months.

Related: Only the rich can afford to work at Oxford and Cambridge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/20/only-the-rich-can-afford-to-work-at-oxford-and-cambridge>

Most of the students I teach are in their first term of university. They, of 
course, need much more than 12 minutes of my time over three months. And it 
often takes me far longer than 7.5 minutes to simply work out what it is they 
are driving at in their submitted work, before I can even begin to provide 
useful feedback.

None of this accounts for the 20 hours of unpaid compulsory training I have to 
attend each year, as well as marking meetings and two lectures a week, which is 
expected of all teachers who are delivering a course for the first time.

 Sometimes I am teaching topics that I have never studied. In these weeks, 
providing my students with a good seminar takes considerably more than one hour 
to prepare. In order to do my job to a basic level of acceptability – never 
mind the “excellence” of the Teaching Excellence Framework (Tef) – my £14 an 
hour ends up as more like £5 an hour.

I care about my students and I want to do a good job. I am not all that 
distant from my own undergraduate experiences and I remember what a difficult 
adjustment it can be. I went from a state school to an Oxbridge college and had 
to spend an enormous amount of time and effort on simply catching up with my 
privately educated peers.

Even if I wasn’t this conscientious, I would still have the constant pressure 
of student feedback, faculty review and the ever-present concern about getting 
a good reference for future jobs.

Related: Academic superstars: stop playing to the cameras and get back to your 
labs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/feb/06/academic-superstars-stop-playing-to-the-cameras-and-get-back-to-your-labs>

The government is intent on pushing for a competitive marketised system, in 
which measures like the Tef will assess teaching according to student 
(customer) feedback and graduate earnings data. This will inevitably have 
consequences for those caught up in the delivery of these services, and 
teachers will face even greater scrutiny and pressure.

 With the rise of postgraduates and the decline of permanent positions, 
entering academia is becoming more of a struggle than it ever has been. We know 
this and our employers know it too. Alongside publications, teaching experience 
is vital for a successful CV. Our employment is entirely at their discretion 
and absolutely vital to our careers.

And this, I suppose, is the basis of any truly profitable market place: 
absolute exploitation.

 Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. Email article 
pitches to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk
