
As you enter yet another cobbled piazza in the centre of the city, it can seem 
as if Rome is a series of stage sets, especially at night. Each piazza has its 
church backdrop, fading palazzo, fountain in endless cascade, lively trattoria 
or neon-lit bar with cluster of plastic chairs, on which characters might act 
out a scene. A moped ridden with arrogant ease comes in from the left and 
almost takes you out as it careers across the cobbles; from the right, a group 
appears on their way home from dinner, their words and white breath filling the 
air. In winter, add thecaldarroste to the scene, the man bent over his iron 
brazier, roasting chestnuts over hot coals, the smell of which curls around the 
piazza.

Scene set, the plot surrounding the caldarroste is a juicy one. Donato 
Tredicene arrived in Rome from a small village in the mountain region of 
Abruzzo in the Sixties, and made a living by selling roast chestnuts on the 
streets. Fifty years later, his family, and their numerous associates, dominate 
Rome’s street food scene. The licences and profits from the chestnuts, 
ice-cream and uninspiring food trucks add up to an astonishing multi‑million 
euro empire. They also have some of the once strictly seasonal stalls roasting 
all year long. The smell of chestnuts in June seems all wrong to me!

Back to the piazza in winter, and the caldarroste man handing you a thick 
paper cone filled with warm nuts, the brittle skin of which is open in a sort 
of smile. As you continue across the cobblestones, you eat.

We have no caldarroste in my neighbourhood of Testaccio, so roasting has to be 
done at home. It is the season when great heaps of chestnuts, shiny like a 
just-buffed mahogany sideboard, are piled on each stall at Testaccio market. 
There are two sorts: the prized, heart-shaped marron, and more ordinary 
castagne, which are smaller as two nuts grow in the same prickly jacket. I tend 
to buy castagne as they are cheaper. I now have the knack of scoring the curved 
edge of each chestnut, which then gapes smilingly open as the nut roasts. One 
advantage of our fierce and ancient gas oven is that it roasts the nuts 
furiously well. I look forward to our roasted chestnut and red wine night, the 
taste of one irresistibly leading to a sip of the other and so on, and on.

Related: Rachel Roddy’s cabbage and sausage cake recipe | Kitchen Sink Tales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/15/cabbage-sausage-cake-oak-tree-pie-recipe-rachel-roddy>

In the past, I only thought of chestnuts as somehow luxurious, the marron 
glacé, the mountain of chestnut puree and cream that is the mont blanc, or as 
part of rich stuffings. Historically, though, their use has been ubiquitous, 
especially in the Alps and Apennines where chestnuts and chestnut flour 
provided basic sustenance for many in the form of bread, pasta, and 
polenta-like meals. Of these simple dishes, my favourites are the soups, 
particularly an odd-sounding, but particularly good one, of salt cod, chickpeas 
and chestnuts, of which today’s recipe is a variation. Chickpea and chestnut is 
a homely, rustic soup, but the starchy sweetness of the chestnuts and the nutty 
softness of the chickpeas make it feel surprisingly rich.

As is the case for many dishes, I have a slow version, and a fast version, 
depending on what I am up to. The slow involves soaking and peeling, the fast, 
tinned and ready peeled: either is good. When it comes to preparing chestnuts, 
traditionally, scoring and boiling is considered best, but I found that 
exasperating, and it took me days to get the bits out from under my nails. Now 
I roast. I find it easier, and it gives the soup a deep, nutty flavour. Once 
the nuts are out of the oven, wrap them in a towel and as soon as they are cool 
enough to handle, start peeling immediately, otherwise you will never remove 
that second pesky layer.

This recipe can be varied; some pancetta in with the celery, various herbs, 
enriched with stock, blended to very creamy or left brothy, boosted with a 
handful of pasta, finished with olive oil or cream. It is better made the day 
or two before, so a good dish for getting ahead. You probably don’t need any 
more suggestions for Christmas food, but this soup does feel festive 
nonetheless, whether it’s supper on your lap by the fire (if you are lucky 
enough to have one), or as part of a more elaborate meal.

Chestnut and chickpea soup

Serves 4 
250g dry chickpeas, soaked in cold water for 12-18 hours, or 500g tinned 
chickpeas, drained
2 bay leaves
500g of whole chestnuts (you want around 350g once shelled)
1 small onion, diced
1 rib of celery, diced 
A sprig of rosemary
6 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
Salt and black pepper

1 Drain the soaked chickpeas, then put in a pan, cover with 1.5 litres of 
water. Cook the chickpeas at a steady simmer, covered, until they are tender. 
The cooking time will vary depending on age of chickpeas, so begin tasting 
after 20 minutes, and every 5 minutes after that. Set aside. If using tinned 
chickpeas, simply drain them.

2 If using whole chestnuts, slash each nut across the curved side, then roast 
on a baking tray at about 200C/400F/gas mark 6 for 25–35 minutes, or until the 
cut has opened wide and the nut is tender. Wrap the hot nuts in a tea towel; 
once cool enough to handle (but still very warm) peel the nuts, making sure to 
remove both the peel and the thin layer underneath.

3 Warm the oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan, over a medium-low flame. 
Gently fry the onion, celery, sprig of rosemary and a pinch of salt until soft 
and fragrant. Add ¾ of the cooked chickpeas, 1.2 litres of chickpea cooking 
water (add tap water if needed) and another pinch of salt. Simmer for 20 
minutes. Add ¾ of the cooked chestnuts, crumbling them into the pan. Simmer for 
15 minutes. Turn off the heat, and taste for salt.

4 The soup consistency depends on you. I remove half the soup (without the 
rosemary) blitz it, with an immersion blender then return it to the pan. To 
serve, divide between bowls, top each with a few whole chickpeas and some of 
the crumbled chestnuts you set aside. Finish with a little more olive oil and 
pepper.

 * Rachel Roddy is a Rome-based food blogger and author of Five Quarters: 
Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/290678/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
(Saltyard, 2015) 