
The dilemma My boyfriend has something of a sex addiction. He follows porn 
accounts on Instagram and Twitter; he has it on his phone and searches for it 
on nights I’m not about. It’s never bothered me, because I also have an 
interest in it, but not to that extent.

A while ago he started texting another girl inappropriately. When I caught 
him, he said he didn’t mean anything by it, that it was just words. Afterwards 
we weren’t as intimate, but his addiction calmed dramatically.

When I felt like being intimate again I would ask for nights to ourselves but 
we never had them – he was always busy with his car or working. It’s like he 
has another side to him that he won’t reveal to me, and if I asked him to tell 
me his sexual secrets he’d be embarrassed but it would be fine to tell the girl 
next door.

Mariella replies Interesting. You describe your boyfriend’s problem as “sex” 
addiction but the one thing he doesn’t seem too interested in is having sex. 
He’s not alone. Extreme immersion insex 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> with strangers appears to make 
sex with the one you love a turn-off.

It’s a state of affairs that we really need to investigate further. We spend 
ever-increasing time online, conducting our working lives, social lives, family 
lives and even our darkest fantasies via our phones and tablets, and in the 
process we’re becoming increasing disconnected from tangible experiences. The 
huge, inexhaustible supply of stimulation that’s out there on the web makes 
focusing on our humdrum lives seem confining, less animated and less enticing.

Cyberspace is the new wilderness and it’s created a whole new breed of 
explorer as it becomes increasingly addictive. Whether you’re crashing into 
strangers on the street as you scroll down your smartphone, or having virtual 
sex with a screen sex worker in a far-flung nation, the world we inhabit is 
being downgraded to a storage environment for the body while the mind is active 
elsewhere.

Your boyfriend’s migration from the place you call home to a cyberworld and 
his ability to better share intimacies with total strangers are both symptoms 
of an increasing malaise. Like many new viruses, it seems to have been born at 
the further reaches of human experience before spreading to all and sundry. Our 
increased migration to virtual sex is a perfect example, beginning with 
committedporn addicts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/26/brain-scans-porn-addicts-sexual-tastes>
 for whom the internet means instant gratification without having to leave 
their bedrooms.

Your boyfriend has joined a fast-growing minority for whom the world we live 
in is more alien than their online habitat

Now more and more people are finding themselves adrift from the physical 
expression of human desire. Your boyfriend seems to have joined a fast-growing 
minority for whom the world we live in is more alien than their online habitat. 
Where oncepornography <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pornography> was 
used as stimulation for flagging sex lives, or an occasional treat for 
adventuring lovers, now it’s become an online cult from which a return to 
normal life becomes ever more difficult. The quagmire of exploited human misery 
that is the online sex industry is preferable to acts of passion that require 
engagement with real people. And how little we seem to be worrying about a 
phenomenon that is shaping new generations.

Despite the deep dark web waiting to entice them, sex education 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/sexeducation> for our children remains 
misguidedly optional on the school syllabus and eschewed in an economically 
challenged education system with little room for subjects that don’t contribute 
to positions on league tables. The vast majority of our children will learn 
about sex from watching often-criminal acts of violence performed by strangers 
on a mate’s computer. How do we expect them to aspire to or even understand the 
potential of fulfilling adult relationships?

So many letters arrive in my mailbox from partners – generally women, it has 
to be said – whose lovers are so busy watching porn that they can’t find the 
inclination to actually have sex. It’s like the great British appetite for 
cookery programmes, which are also, for the most part, a spectator sport; we’re 
a nation of guzzlers, supine on our sofas, watching other people cook while 
devouring ready-made meals so as not to disturb our viewing time. To describe 
it as ironic would be to seriously underplay the dysfunctionality of such 
behaviour. It’s hard work these days to figure out what is desirable, what is 
acceptable, what is a basic minimum requirement and what we can’t live without 
when it comes to the sexual smorgasbord.

The easy answer in your case is that until your boyfriend musters up an 
appetite for human contact and interaction, I’d consider myself single and find 
one of the many remaining individuals who still believe that a bird in the hand 
is worth more than the multitude you can Google.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
