
At first sight, a roughly converted school building in Battersea with 
whitewashed brick walls, cement floors and a narrow stone staircase did not 
hold out much promise of fun and glamour. It even smelt of blackboards and 
chalk.

But once up at the second floor, now a photographic studio, things started to 
look up. Very loud music and a cloud of assistants surroundedMario Testino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/oct/21/mario-testino-interview-fashion-photography>
 like busy gnats, all looking excited and nervous.

Then, through the doorway came a couple of hands clutching dress bags rather 
insecurely, and Princess Diana almost fell into the studio. I remember she was 
wearing a very sharp little black and white houndstooth suit which had been the 
star of John Galliano’s recent show for Dior, and even though she had hardly 
any make up on she looked wonderful – slightly pink and gasping from all the 
stairs she had negotiated.

We were there to shoot some pictures to show the Princess in a new light. She 
wouldn’t be heavily made-up, jewelled and tiara’d in the stiff ballgowns of her 
royal life. She’d be in simple, modern clothes with no jewellery. Her make-up 
and hair would be kept to a natural minimum to suit the new non-ceremonial life 
she had started to lead – and her extraordinary natural beauty.

When the photographs appeared in Vanity Fair in 1997, they made history – no 
one had ever seen the princess look natural, fun and modern in the way that 
Mario revealed that day. But my brush with greatness really started over lunch. 
I had organised a delicious cold picnic which we all ate together round the 
scarred ex-schoolroom tables. During lunch the talk turned to fashion shows and 
catwalk models. Mario is a brilliant mimic and he catwalked from one end of the 
studio to the other, taking off the very different styles of various top models.

Not to be outdone, the princess then leapt to her bare feet and did a very 
convincing Naomi Campbell prowl, followed by a Bardot-like Claudia Schiffer. It 
was absolutely brilliant and we were all crying with laughter and applauding.

I got a letter from her shortly afterwards saying that the shoot in the old 
Battersea schoolroom had been one of the happiest days of her life. It showed, 
I think, in the photographs.
