
T still can't talk. He said "remote control" about four months ago, and has 
never said it again. C's father says babies talk when they need to, and 
considering T always has theremote control, I can see that naming it wouldn't 
really be an issue for him. Perhaps his first sentence will be, "Can you please 
put that battery back in the remote control, so that whenI play with it, some 
disruption actually occurs?" (There is an ongoing early-evening contest, 
between Deal or No Deal and In the Night Garden. Since both these programmes 
are totally inane, I don't see why C and T can't reach a compromise, such as, 
say, turning off the telly, throwing things at each other and screaming "ten 
thousand pounds".)

Sorry, that wasn't entirely accurate: T talks, he just doesn't say words. He 
sets up a constant low blather, varied for emphasis by both volume and tone, 
though what he is emphasising, nobody knows. I think he has a good grasp of 
rhetoric. There's something Churchillian in his ebb and flow.

C derided this theory, but came up with something equally risible, which was, 
"Maybe he's talking French?" (E, his nanny, is French.)

"Babe, we both have GCSE French. We'd notice if he were talking French, unless 
of course he's talking A-level French."

"I don't mean he's talking actual French, I mean maybe he's doing pre-speech 
French blarney."

"But if it's pre-language, how can it be in a language? You loser?" 

"I think he is avoiding learning to talk, to avoid having to talk to you." 

"Well ... well, I think he used to be able to talk, but then he unlearned it, 
during an episode of Deal or No Deal."

Yet, though I scoffed at the French idea, I still asked E if T had been saying 
anything French, like, for instance, her name. She looked at me as if I'd asked 
whether he could drive, or do a tarantella. "Not yet." She paused to laugh at 
me, Frenchly, "No."

Some theories: I did read in a health clinic once that your baby needs to be 
able to hear you talking, so you can't always have the telly on. At the time, I 
decided this was a snobbish conspiracy, because they never mention the radio, 
do they? They just want to make people feel bad for watching Jeremy Kyle. But 
now, I worry that they didn't mention radio because there wasn't enough room on 
the poster. It was taken as given that all audio infotainment would interfere 
with the mother/baby chat-dyad. I've read of people worrying about children 
listening to the radio when they're a bit older, because of all the stuff they 
pick up that you're hiding from them or lying to them about. But maybe with 
babies, even though they can't understand, it is distracting enough anyway that 
they can't pick out "Ball! Marmite!" over "North Utsire, South Utsire".

I do not like this idea: breakfast is boring without the radio on; but at the 
same time, if T's first words were anything at all off Radio 1, 2, 3 or 4, I 
would be really upset, so I'm either going to have to write-off this theory or 
start listening to Kerrang! Quietly.

Another theory, which people often put forward when they want to make you feel 
better, is that profoundly intelligent people, such as Einstein, Mozart, my 
ex's brother and my neighbour's father, to name but four, do not care for 
single words, and won't speak until they can do the whole lot, with verbs and 
grammar and (naturally) rhetorical flourish. There they are, going about their 
business while everybody thinks they're retarded, when suddenly they pipe up, 
"Why do they call you Kitty when your name is Mary-Ann?" I don't mind this 
theory, but I'm not cock-a-hoop about being the kind of person who would rather 
believe their child was a genius than turn off the sodding radio.

I have also noticed that when I talk about T's lack of speech, my own 
vocabulary becomes more and more florid, so that I just had to go back and 
remove the words "ululate," "adumbrate" and "sesquipedalian". I'm trying to 
sound like a cool parent who doesn't care, while at the same time trying to 
disown him for the very deficiency I pretend not to care about. Oh man, this is 
one horrid personality. If he's got my personality, it's probably better if he 
doesn't talk.
