
Making a garden with virtually no flowers is something of a risk, particularly 
when it's open to the public and subjected to plenty of criticism. But the 
newly completed Collector Earl's Garden at Arundel Castle has managed to pull 
it off, largely due to the vast amount of intricate ornamentation.

In this hierarchy of emphasis, the built structures stand out while the 
planting sits back. An abundance of flowers would have taken the eye from the 
fountains and the grotto at the end. The decision to go green was also a 
historical one: the garden is based on the 14th Earl of Arundel's London 
garden, designed by Inigo Jones at the beginning of the 17th century, and 
Jacobeans did not tend to bother much with colour.

Head gardener Gerry Kelsey used a good dose of artistic licence when drawing 
up the planting plan and decided to capitalise on Arundel's mild climate and 
the shelter provided by high walls. Subtropical foliage makes up most of the 
plant material, and alongside tough Trachycarpus fortunei are less hardy palms, 
among them the date palm Phoenix canariensis and the blue-leaved Butia 
capitata. Maintenance is relatively minimal and there is an irrigation system 
that unfortunately waited until Prince Charles arrived to cut the ribbon before 
promptly flooding the garden.

Frost-resistant Italian clay pots are filled with Agapanthus umbellatus 
'Ovatus', which relishes confinement and will flower better as the roots begin 
to crowd the pots.

Less robust plants, including agave (pictured) and Dracaena draco, will spend 
the winter in a polytunnel while salvias and other tender perennials are 
propagated from cuttings in September.

Although the garden design is the work of Isobel and Julian Bannerman, both of 
whom have worked at Highgrove, many of the features, including 'Oberon's 
Palace', are replicas of Inigo Jones's original designs.

The tufa-lined grotto will, in time, go green with algae, making it all the 
more mysterious. White Zantedeschia aethiopica lilies, which can be allowed to 
stand in water, are planted at the base .

Hornbeam hedges running down either side emphasise the linearity of the canal 
and drive the vista through to the temple. This new hedge will take two more 
years to fill out.
