
If I go into my local, Bar Barberini, at about four o’clock – which I often 
do, in need of a short dark jolt ofristretto 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ristretto> – there is a good chance I will meet 
Donato. Once the chef at our nearbytavola calda 
<http://www.italiannotebook.com/local-interest/tavola-calda/> (canteen-like 
eatery), he is now the proud owner of his own place a street away from our 
flat. Standing at Barberini’s sickle- shaped bar, with the clatter of cups and 
the fierce hiss of the coffee machine in the background, Donato has explained 
exuberantly how he makes lasagna, minestra and – most importantly – his 
excellent chicken or rabbitalla cacciatora. He has also told me a fair bit 
about his medical history and the renovation of his vintage car, all of which I 
have listened to attentively, while eyeing up the grappa on the top shelf.

Related: Classic Roman pasta and chickpea broth | Kitchen Sink Tales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/09/chickpea-pasta-soup-recipe-rachel-roddy>

Unlike some versions of this dish, which include tomato, onions and red 
peppers, Donato’s is simple and fragrant. Very good chicken is browned and then 
simmered until tender with white wine and a confetti of finely chopped 
rosemary, chilli and garlic, and the dish finished with a spoonful of vinegar 
and some olives.

Just the thought of making this dish makes me happy – not just because any 
dish that calls for a glass of wine for the pan requires one for the cook, but 
because of the roaring scent rising up from the chopping board, the golden 
crust on the meat, the mighty whoosh the wine makes as it hits the pan, and the 
warm scent that fills the kitchen as the dish bubbles away. I am a rosemary 
lover, immensely fond of its sturdy, wild scent, all sap green and camphor, 
fearless of needles skewered between my teeth. This is why I am happy to live 
in Rome where it is often used with abandon, in soups, with meat and fish, on 
pizza with potatoes.

For this dish I use a serious sprig; you could of course only use a needle or 
two. Dried rosemary is not a great idea here – in fact is it ever? Maybe you 
disagree.

The vinegar may sound like an odd addition, but it works beautifully, 
sharpening the edges of the dish and making it bolder and more defined. My 
Sicilian almost-mother-in-law, who often finishes dishes with vinegar, would 
say the vinegar isla morte sua, which translates as “the death of it”, but in 
an entirely positive way. It is her family stories about cacciatora that remind 
me of its origins: hunter’s style – or in this case, hunter’s wife style, as it 
waszia (aunt) Maria who cooked the rabbit my zio Cecè brought home on his 
shoulder, adding rosemary pulled from the bushes that grow so voraciously in 
Sicily, and vinegar made from the family wine gone wild. When it comes to your 
panful, vinegar is of course optional, as are the olives.

It is impossible to give precise timings, since so much depends on the meat. 
My butcher Roberta, who reassuringly makes her alla cacciatora in much the same 
way as Donato, says a battery animal will cook in significantly less time than 
a free-range one, it will also give out a heck of a lot more liquid. She also 
notes that while the meat is cooking you need to make sure there is enough 
liquid in the pan, and scrape the juices from the bottom of the pan into the 
gravy, which should cling to each piece. By the end the meat should be tender 
and flavoursome and surrounded by just enough flecked aromatic sauce. As with 
so many braises, it better made in advance then reheated, perhaps with another 
splash of wine.

In Rome pollo alla cacciatora is a secondo – a second course – served after 
the pasta, with bread to fare la scarpetta – “do the little shoe”, or mop up 
the juices.Vegetables <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/vegetables> 
would come after as, for the most part, Italians prefer a sequence of small, 
defined courses. I do too. I am also just as happy to have the chicken beside a 
pile of really buttery mash – which is what we had last night – or boiled 
potatoes, polenta, or rice, or possibly green beans. As for the wine, working 
on the principle you are going to drink the rest of the bottle and that this is 
a Roman-ish version, use something from this part of Italy – maybe a dry, 
fragrant malvasia. But you probably know better than me. Whatever you drink, as 
the pan bubbles away, raise a cook’s glass to Donato.

Pollo alla cacciatora (Hunter’s chicken)

Serves 4
5 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
1.5 kg chicken (a small one, jointed, or a mixture of legs and thighs)
2 garlic cloves
1 small chilli pepper, or good pinch of dried chilli
A sprig of fresh rosemary
Salt and black pepper
250ml white wine, plus extra if needed
1 tbsp red wine vinegar
A handful of pitted black olives

1 Cut the chicken into about 12 pieces (I ask my butcher to do this). In a 
deep sauté pan with a lid, large enough to fit the meat in a snug, single 
layer, warm the olive oil over a medium heat. Add the meat pieces, skin-side 
down and cook until the skin forms a golden crust, then turn them over and do 
the same on the other side. This will take about 15 minutes.

2 While the meat is browning, chop the garlic, chilli and needles from the 
rosemary sprig very finely. Once the meat has browned, sprinkle with the 
chopped garlic, chilli and rosemary, season with salt and pepper, pour over the 
white wine, cover the pan and turn the heat down to low.

3 Cook the meat, turning from time to time, until the thighs feel very tender 
when prodded with a fork, and the meat is surrounded by thick gravy – 45–75 
minutes depending on the chicken. If the pan seems a little dry, add a little 
more wine.

4 In the last minutes of cooking add the vinegar and the olives, stir, and 
cook for a minute more, before dividing between warm plates.
