
I live alone on the Isle of Skye in a tipi almost impossible to find without 
detailed directions. It might seem unusual for someone of 16, but I love my own 
company and I’m passionate about preserving wild spaces. I grew up with my mum, 
Ghillie, and older sister, Yazzie, in the wilds of the Cairngorms, in a remote 
and sometimes inaccessible home, using cross-country skis to haul food and 
supplies to the house.

Mum, a cookbook writer, taught us about possible dangers and how to cope with 
them, then let us run wild from an early age. We also travelled abroad 
regularly, visiting remote tribes and cultures, where we lived for weeks as Mum 
studied food and recipes to write about. I spent so much time with tribes who 
rely on the land that this became second nature to me. When I gained a place at
the School of Adventure Studies 
<https://www.whc.uhi.ac.uk/studying-at-whc/school-of-adventure-studies> on Skye 
last year, I decided to live in a tipi, practising what I preach.

I sleep on an ancient canvas camp bed my grandfather gave me, with two old 
army blankets and some skins I tanned myself from roadkill for warmth. I have 
an open fire and spend my evenings tanning animal and fish skins, and carving 
wood. I store clothes and books in an old metal trunk of my mum’s – it’s 
covered in stickers from her travels. I wash my clothes in the river and dry 
them in the wind or in the heat from the fire. I have a bush shower using water 
from the river.

I wake at 6am and get the fire on straight away using flints and steel. 
There’s usually a good bed of embers from the previous day, so the fire is soon 
blazing while I have cereal or bannock, which I bake myself, for breakfast. I 
collect kindling for later in the day, then I wash at the river. Sometimes I 
just jump in, especially when there’s frost on the ground. When I rush back to 
the tipi, it’s like a sauna.

I get my backpack organised, including any food and kit I need for the day, 
bank the fire (by covering it, which keeps it low, but alive) and walk 30 
minutes to the school. There are 12 of us on the course, of all ages, and we’ve 
just finished mountaineering, focusing on practical navigation in the Red 
Cuillin. We’re about to start whitewater kayaking.

I’ve had a few hairy moments. Once I was on the hills when bad weather rolled 
in and I became disoriented, but thanks to Mum’s training, I knew to stay calm. 
My classmates and I recently had a two-day test on the Trotternish Ridge in 
horrible weather, with such a whiteout we could hardly see our feet as we 
pitched our tents. A few people were exhausted and had to be taken off the 
mountain by the leaders, but I feel comfortable in the mountains and enjoyed 
the challenge, though I’m aware of dangers and need to be prepared.

My friends used to love coming to our home and running wild with me, so they 
are used to the way I live. I hope some of them will visit me soon. People ask 
if I miss the internet, but I never used to use it much, or watch television. I 
am sociable, but I have always enjoyed my own company.

I use my mobile every few weeks to catch up with friends and my mum, who I 
usually see once a month when I go back to the Cairngorms. I work with a 
bushcraft expert, Willow Lohr, teaching wild skills to others. I also visit a 
small tribe of bushmen in Namibia. We show each other our ancestral skills to 
keep them alive.

Related: Experience: I fought off a mountain lion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/11/i-fought-off-mountain-lion-experience>

What I’m doing isn’t for everyone, but it makes me happy. I’d like to see more 
people look after the land and not be scared of getting outside, getting wet, 
learning how to survive. I’d like to learn western riding (horse riding like a 
cowboy), because my ambition is to run my own wilderness school, travelling 
on horseback. When my studies are over, I’ll move the tent back to Mum’s house 
and use it to tan skins. Until then, I’m happiest sitting by the flickering 
fire, carving a spoon in perfect silence and watching the northern lights 
through the open tipi door.

• As told to Joan McFadden.

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
