
Dealing with an aggressive colleague? Here are five strategies for managing 
them without losing your cool.

Find your allies

The reality of dealing with an aggressive colleague is that you're probably 
not the only person facing their behaviour and there's no point suffering 
alone. According to Clare Whitmell, ofJob Market Success 
<http://www.jobmarketsuccess.com/about/>, your first point of contact should be 
your colleagues, "ask them how they manage this behaviour and use them as 
support when necessary".

Just make sure it comes across as asking for advice and not moaning, 
particularly if the person you're having trouble with isanother woman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2013/oct/17/how-to-deal-with-difficult-colleague>
.

Put yourself in their shoes

We're all creatures of habit and so most people's behaviour can be worked out 
fairly quickly. Negotiation coach,Clive Rich <http://cliverich.com/>, suggests 
first identifying the type of person you're dealing with; are they an optimist 
or pessimist, do they like making quick decisions or take time to think things 
over, do they focus on the big picture or want to know all the details? Once 
you know this you can reflect that back at them. For example, when pitching 
your big idea to a pessimist make sure you point out the potential problems, 
and explain how you would address them, before they have a chance to.

Bring it back to you

Most aggressive people like to dominate the conversation so it helps to remind 
them that they're dealing with a real person and that their behaviour has an 
affect on you. Bringing the conversation back to how you're feeling and what 
you're thinking can be a way to move beyond their demands. Hilary Jeanes, from
PurpleLine Consulting <http://purplelineconsulting.co.uk/>suggests using "I" 
sentences, such as "I find it really helpful when you..." or "I would like to 
talk about...", to remind them there's another person in the conversation.

Stand up for yourself (or find someone who will)

If you're in a negotiation or difficult meeting with someone who doesn't want 
to let you speak then it's important to make sure that your words have power. 
Whitmell suggests asking your boss for assertiveness training to make sure 
you're confident standing your ground and can express yourself firmly. If 
you're dealing with an office bully now one quick tip is to make sure that your 
boss or another colleague is in meetings with you or copied in on emails 
between the two of you. It's much easier for your colleague to think that 
aggressive behaviour is ok when there's no-one else watching.

Push back

Aggression is often just tactical behaviour, says Rich, and so a simple way to 
deal with it is by calling the other person out. If you know them well, he 
suggests, go with a light tone and something like "just imagine how much better 
this conversation would go if neither of us attacked the other?" or a more 
formal "I feel like there's quite a hostile atmosphere in the room right now, 
how do you feel?". Bringing their behaviour out into the open will force them 
to address it and you'll feel like you've regained some control over the 
situation. And if they're being really difficult Rich suggests, "I'd like this 
conversation to be based on reason, not threats" then sit back quietly and let 
them bluster themselves out.

Have you found yourself dealing with an aggressive colleague? How did you 
manage it? Is there anything you wish you could have done differently? Tell us 
in the comments below.

Sign up to become a member of the Women in Leadership community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/> here for more comment, 
analysis and best practice direct to your inbox
