
Q Having grown up with bone-handled cutlery, I still prefer the feel of a 
light, round-handled knife, fork and spoon in my hand rather than heavy flat 
steel handles. As I'm not giving up my dishwasher, is there any hope of my 
finding well-made plastic-handled cutlery?

Layne Aviss

A In this age of anti petrochemical-product sentiments, it's rare to find a 
consumer who actively seeks out plastic. However, I can understand the wish not 
to abandon your much-loved dishwasher, and experts believe fully loaded, 
energy-efficient models to be less resource-wasting than washing by hand, so 
perhaps you are a little eco minded. Without a doubt the British cutlery master 
for you is David Mellor (the designer, not the politician). Go to
davidmellordesign.com <http://www.davidmellordesign.com> and take a look at his 
Provençal range, which uses high-grade stainless steel and acetal-resin handles 
(which will be warm to the touch) with brass rivets. Available in black, green 
and blue, pieces can be bought individually or in sets. Their gentle, rounded 
shapes give the range a friendly softness, and their design pedigree confers 
the ultimate credibility.

Q How do you remove the smell from a woven wool rug that has been cleaned with 
a 'wet and dry' vacuum cleaner? I might have wet it too much and now that it's 
dry, the rug seems to release an odour.

Martha B

A It's difficult to say exactly why your rug smells once it's been washed - 
and you will find a number of suggestions as to how to get rid of the smell. If 
it is caused by an acid of some type, you could try sprinkling baking soda on 
before you vacuum the rug. This will deodorise by neutralising acids, so it's 
good if you have pets with loose bowels! Alternatively, I have been told when 
buying old carpets that mixing equal parts of white distilled vinegar and water 
and then gently brushing this mixture into the fibres of the rug will clean it 
and remove odours without damage. It's worth trying this on a small area first, 
and if it doesn't work, you can use the mixture on your chips later ... well, 
possibly.

· If you have an interior design question for Oliver Heath, email him at 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
