
I’d be at my mother’s house, in Wimbledon. It’s where I grew up, and it’s full 
of memories. My mum has forever hosted people: actors, musicians, singers, 
mostly from the Bangladeshi community. Her home always feels full of life.

We are opposites, my mother and I. I’m a true minimalist. I like simple, pure 
lines, monochrome spaces devoid of decoration. My mother loves plants and 
colour and photos and ornaments – she’s a collector at heart. Where she is 
western painting, I’m Japanese: while everyone was filling the canvas here, the 
Japanese were emptying it. I’m interested in that – space, natural space, 
internal space.

I’d want to eat in the garden. It would be late summer, nearly autumn – I love 
the transition between seasons more than the seasons themselves. The garden is 
magnificent and chaotic, full of blues, reds, yellows, purples, greens.

My mother would be there, along with my family and Eddie Izzard. I’d also want 
Björk and the film director Alejandro González Iñárritu to come. I’d love to 
have a conversation with Stravinsky about patterns (I see them where he hears 
them) and another with Aung San Suu Kyi about the obsession of power.

Lastly, I’d like Thomas Heatherwick 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Heatherwick> to join us. He’s in the 
wrong job – he should be a choreographer. He talks like one. He thinks in the 
realms of movement – of the object, yes – but not just its physicality; of how 
it moves in space.

It’d be a feast of Japanese food. Sashimi, tuna in particular. Japanese rice. 
Miso soup. Okonomiyaki.

I’m a big meat eater, but I wouldn’t want much meat for this meal. Mostly 
vegetables – which is unusual for me. Japanese salad is the only time I allow 
something green to be within 5 miles of my plate.

I only started eating green things after I married my wife, Yuko, who is from 
Kyushu. It’s the types of leaf, and the miso and citruses in the dressings. 
They are so creative with vegetables.

And then chocolate. I have a sweet tooth. It has to be Cadbury’s milk 
chocolate – in my pocket, not on the table. I’m not going to share that with 
anyone. I’d have Matcha green tea, and to finish, a cappuccino.

No music. Björk might sing, Stravinsky would be tapping away. I would just be 
listening.

 * Akram Khan Company: Until the Lions is at Brighton Festival from 26-27 May 
2016;brightonfestival.org <http://www.brightonfestival.org> 