
I don’t use shampoo, and haven’t in over five years.

I’m not disgusting, I swear, it’s just that I quickly tired of spending an 
embarrassing amount of money on “natural” brands (it’s a seriously horrendous 
amount – take whatever you’re thinking, and double it). I decided I’d try to 
stop buying it altogether instead.

Turns out, you can make your own, and the results are fantastic. 

How, you ask? Mix one tablespoon of baking soda into 250ml of warm water. Stir 
until dissolved (it helps if you whisper things like “free-range” and “namaste” 
while doing so), then pour it over wet hair. Massage this magical mixture into 
your scalp and rinse well.

For your conditioner, a tablespoon or two of apple cider vinegar or lemon 
juice diluted in 250ml of warm water will do the trick. Pour over washed hair, 
leave to set in for a few minutes, then rinse. It will leave hair squeaky clean 
and soft. The only caveat applies to those with hard water: you have to boil 
the water for a few minutes before using it, or risk the high mineral content 
sabotaging your efforts (don’t look at me like that – I do boil my water, too).

I love this concoction, but every few months or so I run out of ingredients or 
time to make it, so you find me lathering up with store-bought shampoo instead.

My four sisters are jerks, so when it happens (or if I use a disposable coffee 
cup instead of my trademark coffee jar, or when I used to swap my daughter’s 
cloth diapers for disposables while travelling), they instantly pounce.

“Smear blog!” they gleefully cry, referencing a longstanding joke about 
creating an online forum devoted to defaming my notoriously eco-friendly public 
persona. They threaten to publish paparazzi-style photos of me holding the odd 
much-maligned plastic bag, or furtively gnawing on a piece of bison jerky 
(because of course I am vegetarian, too).

The smear blog is a joke (right, guys?) because green types like me have, 
perhaps fairly, earned a reputation for being a tad sanctimonious – preachy 
do-gooders ready to judge you for your own personal failings while resolutely 
pretending not to have any of their own.

We’ve created a mighty pissing contest, and no one wants to admit that they 
might not have the greenest stream.

This kind of perfection is profoundly irritating, not to mention impossible to 
maintain. Andgood lord, why would you want to? Imperfections mean you are 
human, fallible, trying your best but sometimes missing the mark.

I don’t function well within the confines of absolutes – something that has 
come with age. These days, I’m happy if I do something successfully 80% of the 
time, and don’t allow myself to descend into a debilitating shame-spiral when I 
inevitably fail. When did perfection, or the illusion of such, become 
mandatory? Are we really arguing that if you can’t commit 100% of your life to 
a cause, it’s not worth doing at all?

Of course not.

This brings me neatly to a Guardian reader appropriately named BleakFTW, who 
commented onlast week’s column about secondhand shopping 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/15/eco-friendly-fashion-furniture-thrift-shopping>
:

“All the guff she’s talking about in the article is meaningless if she drives, 
or if she flies … You can’t be serious about having an eco-friendly lifestyle 
unless you cut them out first.”

Really? OK, yes, on a purely environmental basis we’d all be better off giving 
up our cars and our electricity and living in yurts. To achieve maximum 
environmental impact we’d ground flights, turn our backs on advertising and 
consumer culture, and hand-weave a single burlap sack towel for each of our 1.5 
children.

Hands up those willing to do that? Anyone? 

Driving a car, having a refrigerator or a cellphone – even occasionally using 
evil plastic bags – exactly none of these things disqualifies you from being an 
environmentally friendly person if you continue making greener choices 
elsewhere.

If you were reading about my strange little shampoo situation above, shaking 
your head and thinking, “There is no way this strange Canadian lady can 
convince me to wash my hair with the same stuff I use to unclog my kitchen 
sink,” does that make you a crap environmentalist? No.

Not doing anything because you can’t do everything? That makes you a crap 
environmentalist, and a defeatist. No one likes a defeatist.

Do what you can and ditch the guilt. You don’t have to wash your hair with 
baking soda to make a difference, although it would make a certain strange 
Canadian lady immensely happy if you did. Even just once.
