
 In 1987 I found myself homeless, having moved to London from Leeds, and was 
directed to Eaves (then known as Homeless Action), a charity set up a decade 
earlier that provided homes for single, low-income women. I was given a room in 
a terraced house in Peckham, which I shared with five other women, some of whom 
were homeless as a result of sexual violence. I would see the support workers 
come over to take care of these vulnerable women, and was impressed at how much 
difference it made to their daily lives.

Last week I sat at my desk in Eaves for Women 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women>, and watched the staff clear 
out their desks. The funding had gone and the charity had no choice but to go 
into administration.

 Eaves will leave behind the 1,000 or so service users who access the charity 
every year, asking for support, advocacy, or long-term social work. Eaves was 
unique in that ,since it appointed the formidable Denise Marshall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/08/feminist-campaigner-denise-marshall-cancer-eaves>
 in 2000 as its chief executive, it combined direct support to women who had 
experienced a wide range of male violence and abuse, with campaigning, 
lobbying, research, policy, and peer-support programmes in which service users 
could go on to volunteer to work with other vulnerable women.

I have been a research consultant for Eaves since 2004, and was a friend of 
Marshall,who died in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/denise-marshall>. But even 
putting aside my personal ties to the organisation, it’s clear to see how this 
cruel and ruthless government is slashing women’s services and expecting them 
delivered on the cheap; increasingly, women’s charities are being given less 
money to see the same number of women, and are expected to cut the quality of 
the services. In order to be competitive when applying for local or central 
government grants the costs for core services, such as rent and administrative 
support, are often undercut to the point where it was almost impossible to run 
an office.

 Marshall refused to put costs above quality. Having seen other women’s 
charities being taken over by generic organisations which then paid the staff 
less and provided poorer services to abused women, Marshall was having none of 
it. In 2011,she returned her OBE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/feb/15/women-refuge-chief-protest-cuts>
 in protest at government cuts.

 “As a feminist organisation, you have to deliver your services in that 
context in order to change things in the long term,” says Karen Ingala Smith, 
the director of the NIA Project and former employee of Eaves. “This government 
is only interested in delivering the bare minimum to women and girls because of 
its own massive budget cuts.”

 Eaves had been in financial difficulty since 2010. In 2011, the Home Office 
gave Eaves a total of £4m to run two essential services – one, the Poppy 
Project, which houses and supports women trafficked into the UK, and the 
Scarlett Centre, a drop-in support centre for women that provided support to 
seek work or education. The following year, Eaves received nothing. The 
government grant to support trafficked women went to the Salvation Army, which 
had submitted an application for considerably less funding and a pared-down 
service, and Scarlett was closed for good.

 We need to get back on to the streets to protest these savage cuts to the 
women’s sector, and make sure everyone knows that all woman can be a step away 
from needing the type of support Eaves provided. Are women’s lives really that 
worthless?


