
The first time I called Izzie Orr to talk about her geese, her mother answered 
the phone. "I'm very sorry," she said. "Izzie's asleep. I don't think she'd 
thank me for waking her up - she was milking at 4.30 this morning." The second 
time I rang, her mother answered again, and told me that Izzie was moving hay 
from one farm to another. The third time I tried, I finally got hold of Izzie - 
she was on a tractor doing something or other. Talk about multi-tasking. This 
woman has a work ethic that makes Stakhanov look like a shirker.

It turns out that Izzie doesn't just have geese. She rears pedigree Hereford 
and Black Hereford cattle for beef and keeps three pigs for pork, farm-sits for 
other farmers who need a break and does the milking for others. And she's a 
vegetarian. Not by conviction: she just doesn't like the taste of meat. Never 
did, even as a child, her mother says.

Izzie's geese lie all together, 50 of them, like a great, fat, white duvet 
laid out on the field by the bungalow she shares with her mother. Last year she 
had 100, but she doesn't have enough land to look after that many properly, so 
50 is fine.

Geese are one of the great traditions of Norfolk. Mrs Beeton extolled their 
virtues. According to Laura Mason and Catherine Brown in their magisterial The 
Taste Of Britain (Fourth Estate), the flocks were fattened on stubble after the 
harvest, before being driven to goose fairs in Nottingham and London - Poultry, 
a street in the centre of the City of London, was the focus of the trade, which 
gives rise to all kinds of unkind thoughts in these troubled times.

I have always liked the goose, and not simply for its eating qualities (hot 
goose is a delight, but cold is a wonder). No, it's the unbiddable nature of 
the bird that attracts me. In spite of man's best efforts, geese will lay their 
eggs only at a particular time, which is why you get them on the menu between 
Michaelmas and Christmas only. As Eddie Heggarty of Norfolk Geese told me, the 
flesh takes on a different texture as the birds move towards breeding after 
Christmas, and you can't eat them.

There is a native breed, Brecon Buff, but most are foreign hybrids - Roman 
(Italian), Pilgrim (North American), Toulouse (French) and Emden (German). 
Eddie relies on the Danish Legarth and, seeing as she gets her goslings through 
Eddie, Izzie does, too. She aims to get them up to the 18-20lb mark, enough to 
feed six to eight people, by the time Christmas comes round. In practice, most 
of her geese reach about 14lb, but they live a happy and largely stress-free 
life, fattened on windfall apples from Izzie's trees - "They really like the 
ones that have gone a bit brown" - as well as the grass and feed.

Izzie looks on her geese with a very fond eye. "They're like teenagers, 
really," she says. "They just can't keep their mouths shut." She's right, too - 
her flock keeps up a companionable chatter all the time, which rises quickly to 
an ear-busting racket whenever they're disturbed. But Izzie has no sentiment 
about sending them off to the knacker's yard, to be killed, hung for seven to 
10 days, and then hand-plucked and waxed.

"This isn't a rescue farm," she says. "Not many people are going to keep them 
as pets if we didn't eat them." Even so, Izzie admits to talking to her geese, 
as well as to her other animals. "My partner says, 'If only you talked to me 
the same way you do your animals.'" She laughs. It's time for her to feed other 
windfalls to her Herefords. I wonder if she ever stops.

So what about putting a goose on the menu this Christmas, Michaelmas or Boxing 
Day? I've nothing against turkey, but a roast goose has such a rich flavour, 
not to mention the bonus of providing oceans of exquisite fat in which to fry 
your potatoes or eggs for months after the big day.
