
“This is Zero Black Alpha in position at south gate. No sign of ambulance yet.”

I acknowledged my boss’s message, and cringed at his choice of call sign. Ten 
minutes earlier we had received an alert in the security office that Rachel was 
cutting herself. She was more practical than your average self-harmer: on her 
last session, she’d hidden razor blades so she could carry on slicing when they 
got her to the minor injuries department.

“This is Zero Black Alpha. Ambulance now audible. Repeat, audible.”

Related: Campus security: 'We heard a scream and saw him running up the road 
naked' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/06/university-campus-security-guard-scream-sprinting-nude>

Standing outside her bedroom, I felt bad for Rachel. She wanted attention 
(what teenager doesn’t?) but not like this, not her flatmates giggling at my 
boss’s radio language. Something was clearly eating her up. I have experienced 
it – I pulled a blade up my arm as a kid once – but in my defence, there was no 
web back then. Just Manic Street Preachers CDs.

“This is Zero Black Alpha. Ambulance on scene. Heading to target with medical 
backup. Standby. Standby.”

I straightened myself, listened for the slow tramp of paramedics. Rachel’s 
flatmates were wondering why they weren’t running, like on Casualty or CSI.

Two green uniforms appeared in the corridor. My boss jogged in front of them.

“Can you confirm no one has been in or out of Room 19 since you commenced 
posting?”

I nodded. My boss pointed at the door. “Admit the paramedics.”

I turned my master key and the paramedics filed into Rachel’s room.

A minute later, there was a knock. I opened the door and saw green trousers 
and a frown.

“Very funny, pal. Where is she?”

"An elderly bloke started swearing at us in Ukrainian – his paraplegic 
daughter had been given an unadapted box room"

My boss had been so focused on Googling special forces call signs that he 
hadn’t thought Rachel might be cutting herself outdoors. Whoever reported her 
wasn’t in her flat. He started blinking.

As discreetly as I could, I turned up my radio and told my colleagues to look 
for a girl with pink hair, silver Converse and one dripping arm. They’d already 
found her. She’d gone to them for plasters.

I wasn’t in the job long before I realised kids like Rachel are everywhere. 
They are the ones with a squeaky wheel, and no one around to oil it.

There are the skippers; girls with immaculate figures on bonkers no-breakfast 
diets. They go to bed hammered, dash to their first class and flake out at 11am 
in front of 60 of their mates. We can often be found pulling them off a lecture 
room floor, goading them into eating a Toffee Crisp.

Then there are the students who don’t declare a major disability, either 
through pride or because there isn’t the right box on their Ucas form. One 
summer, an elderly bloke came to our counter and started swearing at us in 
Ukrainian. When we followed him, we found his paraplegic daughter who had been 
allocated an unadapted box room.

One term later, she was finally in the right accommodation but was too proud 
to acknowledge it. She wouldn’t let the cleaners change her sheets – she would 
wait until Sunday and ring us to do it. The head of pastoral welfare told us to 
be professional, to firmly refuse. I guess professional means leaving a girl 
lying in faeces while you leave message after message on the 24-hour welfare 
response mobile.

Not all the invisible students are victims. Not all of them are invisible 
either. We’re currently dancing around a first-year dealer who gave police the 
slip when they came to lift him (he told them their suspect was the skinny lad 
in the kitchen, then jumped out the window wearing nothing but a wrapped ounce 
and tracksuit bottoms). Less dangerous but just as time-consuming is the boy 
with an unlicenced guide dog. After it had shat in the mail room and kept 30 
kids awake all night yapping, he admitted it was a stray he had found tied up 
at a service station.

Related: Bomb threats, breakdowns and bongs: the life of a university security 
guard 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/15/bomb-threats-breakdowns-and-bongs-the-life-of-a-university-security-guard>

Most of the time, I don’t blame the students for acting up. On intake day, 
they watch their parents’ brake lights fade away and you sense their 
disappointment. A few faces always get on your radar early, like the girl with 
Nead (psychogenic non-epileptic seizures) who would lose consciousness once a 
day, and spent so long on the floor that we assigned her her own roll of hazard 
tape.

Others get noticed later, but in spectacular fashion. A squad car roared up 
outside our office one night and a PC strode in, hands in his vest.

“We’ve got one of yours in the back,” he said, throwing a campus ID card on 
the counter. “Young lad going apeshit. Took two of us to cuff him. Get him 
calmed down or we’re taking him down the station.”

The night guard looked at the ID. “Ryan Strowger. D3. You know he’s epileptic, 
don’t you?”

It turns out Casualty and CSI aren’t as spiced up as I thought. The emergency 
services do run sometimes.

If you have been affected by any of the issues raised this article, you can 
callthe Samaritans 
<http://www.samaritans.org/how-we-can-help-you?gclid=CNLV6OSGgsQCFcXItAodkl8AYA>
 on 116 123.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
