
Hello, welcome to Awesomely Alicia, my blog where you’re about to find that 
awesome eating can truly turn your life around! Trust me, I used to live on 
toxins. I was bloated and tired with short hair. It was only after an almost 
fatal popcorn overdose that I discovered that natural, clean eating really is 
the key to a happy, healthy and all-round insanely fabulous life in London’s 
Notting Hill. I live here with my divine banker husband and beautiful blond 
kids whose favourite thing is helping mummy make her anti-inflammatory 
courgette spaghetti with fermented turnip shavings, mood-enhancing cacao and 
sprouted hemp salsa. Kids really can learn that true happiness means eating 
right! Although I’m not saying regular sprinklings of my own Super Brainy Dust 
(featuring hand-gathered volcanic ash with heirloom coconut flour and Mexican 
limpet milk extract) haven’t helped!

Related: Modern tribes: the digital dad 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/20/modern-tribes-digital-new-dad-catherine-bennett>

So the secret to awesome eating is: there is no secret! Just learn to love 
yourself. Listen to your body. Then enjoy becoming happier and blonder every 
day. I do! All I had to do was give up gluten, sugar, salt, alcohol, red meat, 
tap water, unsaturated fats, potatoes and poisonous processed foods, and switch 
to scrupulously sourced natural plant food, grown on uncontaminated soil tended 
by farmers who use ancient Californian methods to produce dream veggies glowing 
with liver-cleansing antioxidants. Simple!

If you’re willing to give up paid work, which I totally recommend if you’re 
serious about your skin, it takes no time to prepare insanely delicious but 
mega-healthy recipes such as my dreamy holistic breakfast to strengthen 
sluggish ovaries: bone broth and almond milk smoothie with home-smoked sea 
vegetables and organic gold dust to refurbish the heart and improve abstract 
thought. It’s awesomely satiating and takes only 10 weeks to prepare! Meditate 
for three hours afterwards, and your mind and body will be ready to build your 
own smokehouse for tonight’s super-energised menu – all recipes in my fifth 
book. Let’s take this amazing journey together, love and happiness from Alicia 
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
