
What does my unicorn bag say about me?

Shady <http://www.puricuties.com/>’s plush unicorn handbag is called Percy, 
and she bought it online a few years ago after a phase of watching My Little 
Pony. “It’s sort of childish, but you’re as young as you want to be. I love 
kawaii style; a lot of bloggers are quite plain and boring.”

And what it really says

Shady is asking us to check out Percy, her unicorn bag, but I’m finding him 
hard to spot. Percy co-ordinates so well with Shady’s outfit that he’s not 
making much of an impact. We can barely see him. Percy isn’t officialMy Little 
Pony merch, by the way: I asked my five-year-old daughter if she’d seen 
anything like Percy, and she said she hadn’t. And she knows.

Unicorns are fairytale creatures, designed for childish imaginations, and many 
women use cutesy kitsch to hold on to childhood. Being an adult woman is not 
always fun: it means you’re seen as sexualised, asking for comment and lechery. 
The innocence of younger days can seem appealing.

Shady is using Percy as part of her kawaii look. But Shady’s look is not 
straightforward. She might be using kawaii – that cutesy, big-eyed little girl 
Japanese style – but she combines it with her own, stronger attitude. Unicorns, 
ribbons, pink, kawaii: these are all about little girlyness. But Shady holds 
herself with strength. We notice her make-up: pure adult glamour. We notice her 
hair: braided, nonwhite. Her shoes are pure drag queen. Her outfit says cute, 
her stare says not. She looks clubby, rather than straightforwardly fashion: 
plenty of women would wear her outfit to a rave.

Kawaii is highly stylised and gendered, mixing girlish passivity with sex. 
It’s not a turn-on for me, though plenty of others might find it hot. What I 
find hotter about Shady is how she owns her outfit. She’s taken something 
playful and silly and made it more confrontational. She might have Pinkie Pie 
around her neck, and Percy on her arm, but she has SHADY across her chest.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
