
Q: I would like to take my wife and 12-year-old daughter to Athens overland. 
Is this possible? If so, can we go via Venice and then by sea across the 
Adriatic. Or do such old-world routes no longer exist?

Edward Bates, by email

A: It is possible to reach Athens overland, and there are several connections. 
A rail and sea route via Italy is the fastest and cheapest. It involves 
travelling, not to Venice, but to the southern Adriatic port of Bari via Paris 
and Bologna and on from Bari to Patras by ferry. Fast inter-city trains run 
from here to the Greek capital. The whole thing can take as little as three 
days, but it costs much more than flying: you'll pay at least £400 for a return 
journey. Of course you might consider flying one way and going overland the 
other.

Seat61 (seat61.com <http://www.seat61.com>) has details of this journey and 
the other overland option, the rail-only route via Cologne, Vienna, Belgrade 
and Thessaloniki.

If you want to go to Venice, you can sail with Minoan Lines (minoan.gr 
<http://www.minoan.gr>), from the lagoon city to Corfu, Igoumenitsa and Patras 
up to four times a week. This sailing takes longer and costs more than the 
routes above, but it is more romantic, following in the footsteps of Marco Polo.

Q: Our daughter and her partner and two children, aged six and eight, arrive 
from hot and sunny Western Australia on 22 December, and before 6 January they 
want a very short break (three to four days) somewhere where they might 
experience snow. Money is in short supply. Can you help?

Penny Jaques, by email

A: The bad news for budget travellers is that December and early January is a 
very expensive time of year to travel. Go for as late in this period as 
possible to get the best prices.

The best way to get to somewhere with guaranteed snow would be to take a 
budget flight to somewhere like Oslo and make the most of the snow from there. 
Ryanair (ryanair.com <http://www.ryanair.com>) has flights from London Stansted 
to Oslo Torp or Rygge (both substantial bus rides from the Norwegian capital) 
for £15 between 4 and 6 January. The best room I found was £60 a night at the 
Best Western Anker Oslo via www.gtahotels.com <http://www.gtahotels.com>.

Once you're in Oslo, you can get out into the snowy wilderness quickly by 
taking the T-Banen metro service to Besserud and then the connecting bus to 
Frognerseteren. This is a popular area for locals to hike and ski and do all 
the things your daughter's family are dreaming of doing. It goes without saying 
that it will be very cold and get dark early, so they should pack accordingly.

There's always the chance that it might be snowing in higher places in 
Britain. If they're prepared to wait, taking a train or driving up to the 
Highlands might well yield some snow. If not, conditions may be beautiful 
enough for them not to mind too much. See http://white.visitscotland.com 
<http://white.visitscotland.com> for more information.

Q: We are thinking of hiring a campervan and driving from Cairns to Adelaide 
during the school holidays next summer on a one-trip-sees-all visit just to get 
away from everything here and to beat the recession. Are there any travel books 
(not guide books but anecdotal ones) specifically for campervanners who have 
done this route? We would like to road test in print before we test the road in 
the van!

John Iley, by email 

A: It's worth seeking out Jonathan Green's Around Australia in Eighty Days, an 
Australian journalist's well-written account of a circuit of his home country. 
The book is published by Thames & Hudson and is only available in Australia. 
Try www.seekbooks.com.au <http://seekbooks.com.au> for stockists. You should 
also get Bill Bryson'sDown Under (Black Swan, £8.99), which has the usual mix 
of wit and unearthed stories.

Q: Next June we plan to head off around the world for our big adventure, and 
we hope to be away for a year to two years. Among other journeys, we're 
planning to go from Alaska to Beijing and then on the Trans-Siberian Railway to 
Moscow – via Mongolia. My concerns are: we want to catch the Mongolian summer – 
we hope to coincide with some Mongolian friends, who head out of the city to 
camp all summer – and we want to visit Lake Baikal in Russia. Also, how on 
earth do we arrange visas for this way round and these three countries?

Aowyn Sanderson, by email 

A: Make this section of your journey between May and July to get the best 
weather in Siberia and catch your friends. To fly from Alaska to Beijing, 
you'll probably need to go via a west-coast American hub such as Los Angeles. 
Way to Russia (www.waytorussia.net <http://www.waytorussia.net>) is the best 
place to plan this journey.

You're going to need to organise these visas while you're travelling so that 
they're still valid when you need them. Mongolian visas, for example, are valid 
for only 90 days from the date of issue, so arranging them in the UK is not an 
option. First, get a Chinese visa, then apply for Mongolian entry permits while 
in the Chinese capital. However, recent travellers' reports (see http://
bit.ly/5Owb2d <http://bit.ly/50wb2d>) suggest that you can't get anything more 
than a 10-day transit visa for Russia when you're in Beijing, so arrange this 
visa once you get to Ulan Bator. Before you leave home, check what you need in 
the way of passport photos and invitations. Using a local agency in Beijing or 
Ulan Bator to arrange visas will be more expensive but much quicker.

FEEDBACK

You asked for suggestions on the practicalities of travelling with infant 
twins (Letters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/nov/29/ask-tom-travel-tips?page=2>, 
last week). My suggestion (as the mother of twins) would be, er, don't.

These guys sound like they are well travelled, and they may like to reflect on 
why one so rarely sees folk travelling with infant twins. Which is because it 
is hell. Most parents think twice before they travel with one baby, let alone 
two. My advice would be to make no plans until the babies are safely born, 
feeding is established and they are sleeping simultaneously for at least four 
hours a night. If they then have enough energy to plan a holiday, good luck.

Clare Collins, by email
