
Our father, Philip Wraight, who has died aged 97, was a secondary school 
headmaster for 26 years. He began teaching in 1946 at Seaford college in West 
Sussex, but exchanged the South Downs for the Staffordshire Moorlands in 1958 
when he became head of the new Warslow secondary school near Leek. Remaining in 
Staffordshire, he became head of the Forest of Needwood high school near Burton 
upon Trent in 1966, a position he held until his retirement in 1984.

Philip shared the progressive ideas of JHP Oxspring, Staffordshire’s former 
director of education, and, like him, was an advocate of rural-based, 
comprehensive secondary schools. During the 1970s, through the University of 
London, Philip visited Sweden, Russia, Hungary and Poland to discover how other 
countries organised their schools.

Notably self-effacing, Philip worked as a headteacher with great diligence and 
integrity, and gained much respect for enabling happy and successful school 
communities to flourish. It was a source of much local regret that under a 
controversial “rationalisation” programme in 1984, Philip’s last year before 
retirement, the highly regarded Forest of Needwood school was forced to 
amalgamate.

Philip was born in Faversham, Kent, the only child of Frank, a finance 
officer, and his wife, Lilian (nee Dove). He attended Caterham school, Surrey, 
and in 1937 went to Jesus College, Oxford. There Philip knewHarold Wilson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/1995/may/25/obituaries>, whose intellect 
he greatly admired. In 1938-39, Philip was secretary of the Oxford University 
Peace Council, a forum for discussion and action on human rights and justice in 
Europe, Japan and China.Margaret Bramall 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/aug/17/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
(later director of the National Council for One Parent Families) was the 
council’s chair, defeating another future prime minister,Edward Heath 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives>, 
for the position.

In 1940, during the second world war, Philip joined the Royal Artillery. He 
was stationed in India and took part in the Burma campaign, rising to the rank 
of captain. On leave in Sri Lanka (then Ceylon), he met our mother, Elsie (nee 
Wilson), a volunteer nurse from Dundee, and they were married for 70 years.

Philip’s values were in keeping with someone of his generation. He was formal 
(he wore a jacket and tie every day) and principled – and above all, honest and 
fair. The fact that all three of his children became teachers is testament to 
his influence and inspiration.

Philip is survived by Elsie, by us, by our sister, Margaret, and by four 
grandchildren and five great-grandchildren.
