
I’m writing to you as I feel it’s been quite a while since we last spoke (two 
years to be exact, you hung up on me). So how is Germany? How old are your 
other children now? What have you been up to this year? I finished my A-levels 
this summer. But enough small talk. On our mammoth European road trip in the 
summer, the journey took us close to your house and I asked Mum and my stepdad 
if we could take a detour so that I could see you. Outside your house, I 
couldn’t bring myself to get out of the car and knock on the door.

How did we get into this situation? I sat there, an outsider, watching your 
house through disappointed eyes.

Now the what-ifs run through my mind: what if I had knocked on the door? Would 
you have let me in? Or would you have left me hovering outside, exchanging 
empty words without saying anything real?

What I need is a father, not chitchat and someone who shuts the door on me 
when the truth gets too much.

I’ve tried so many different forms of communication – email, the phone and I 
also suggested Skype. Yet I still can’t get through to you.

Why can’t your parental obligations stretch to all three of your children, 
not just your two recent ones?

My mum, stepdad and I sat around the table trying to work out why I had felt 
unable to knock on your door that day. At last it came to me. I think, perhaps 
subconsciously, I was saving myself the grief of your response.

Why can’t your parental obligations stretch to all three of your children, not 
just your two recent ones? You can’t seem to grasp my feelings of frustration 
about wanting to talk about the past. In our previous conversations, which 
ended abruptly, as your older son needed to be put to bed, I’d ask you how he 
was doing at school etc, and you’d talk about the weather. No one listening in 
would be able to tell there was any difference between our relationship and one 
you might have with a neighbour.

Forget your excuses – that the flight to visit me is expensive and that you 
need to look after your other children (I hope you can see the irony in that). 
While you watch their school plays, don’t you consider that I would have liked 
you to be there at mine? Or to see me glammed up before my prom? Couldn’t I be 
included in your family?

According to Mum, I make similar jokes to yours and I try to swallow the lump 
in my throat when she laughs and says I’ve inherited my sense of humour from 
you. Maybe she does it to keep alive the connection to the slight relationship 
that exists between us.

Perhaps the reason I didn’t knock on your door was that I just don’t care any 
more. If someone doesn’t believe in me, I lose the will to believe in them. I’m 
exhausted trying to make this work. Maybe a part of me wasn’t actually bothered 
whether I saw you or not that day – you’ve already lost so much meaning in my 
life; you are somone who sends me a birthday card.

You haven’t given me much to hold on to. Perhaps the light had been dimming 
for a long time and it is only now that I realise the light is turned off. With 
you living in another country, maybe we never had a chance to build a 
relationship. So is it safe to say let’s call it a day? Clearly you can’t give 
me what I need and I’m actually doing perfectly well with Mum and my stepdad.

This isn’t me being bitter, although I was initially. It’s just a way of 
telling you how I really feel without being dismissed.

Phoebe
