
Every Christmas, the firm I worked for raised money for disadvantaged kids in 
the area, and everyChristmas <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>
 I’d dress as Santa and drive out with a couple of colleagues to deliver gifts. 
Some years ago, we were returning to work in my pickup, and stopped at an 
intersection as the lights turned red.

We were in the middle lane, right in front of the lights, and I became aware 
of an SUV coming up behind us at speed; at the last moment, it switched to the 
righthand lane and carried straight on past the red light into traffic moving 
west to east. It slammed into another vehicle, causing it to veer off, then 
they both skidded to a halt. Seconds later, the lights turned green. I turned 
my truck sideways to block the traffic, jumped out and ran to the SUV.

Inside, I saw a man slumped over the wheel. As I hollered at my workmates to 
call the police and fire department, there was a loud bang and flames leapt 
from the car’s front. I had been a volunteer firefighter for many years and had 
attended automobile accidents before; seven years earlier, I’d even been called 
to the wreck of my own son’s car. Jordan’s tyre had blown out as he drove to 
work and he died of his injuries, aged 17. I’d struggled to cope with his loss, 
but remained dedicated to helping others when I could.

As the blaze grew fiercer, I knew the car’s battery had exploded and that 
there was no time to lose. Still wearing my costume, I dashed round to the 
passenger side, away from the flames. The door was locked and slightly buckled, 
but by pulling on the window frame, I managed to tear it open. It was a cold 
day, but flames were now rolling over the hood and I was sweating in my suit. I 
leaned in, unbuckled the driver’s belt and started to pull him across to the 
passenger side. That’s when he came to and, confused, started yelling and 
trying to fight me off. “Sir,” I said, “your car’s on fire – let’s get out of 
here.” He calmed down, and I walked him over to the safety of my truck.

Other than some cuts and bruises, he was fine. I left him with my workmates, 
who were still wearing their elf hats, and went to check on the driver of the 
other car, who was also unhurt. Then I headed back to the intersection, where I 
directed traffic around the burning vehicle until the emergency services 
arrived. The first two police officers on the scene laughed as they jumped out 
of their patrol car. “What’s happened here, Santa?” one of them asked. I 
briefed them, then they said: “OK, you probably have deliveries to make – we’ll 
take over from here.”

On the way back to work, I said to my colleagues: “What you saw, keep it under 
your hats, OK?” I didn’t want the notoriety. But an hour later I had a call 
from a friend on a local TV station – our daughters play on the same softball 
team. “Brad,” he said, “I have a picture here that someone’s sent in of Santa 
helping out at a traffic accident and Santa sure looks a lot like you.” I tried 
to deny it at first, but it was clear he knew, and I figured that if someone 
was going to break the story, it might as well be him.

The next day, my cubicle at work was decorated with model Santas, some wearing 
Superman capes. I hoped that would be the end of it, but the story was to have 
an unexpected coda. A couple of weeks after the accident, I agreed to a 
televised reunion with Michael Walker, the guy I’d pulled from the car. We met 
in a local park, where he was sitting at a picnic table with a young woman. We 
shook hands, he thanked me, then he introduced me to his daughter, Amber.

It turned out she had been estranged from her mum and dad, but returned home 
after the accident. What’s more, she had been a close high school friend of 
Jordan, my son. She had a file full of pictures of him that I’d never seen, and 
told me stories that made him live again for me. She said as soon as she’d 
realised who had helped her dad, she became convinced Jordan was somehow still 
looking out for her.

Related: Experience: I lost my dog for nine months 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/13/experience-i-lost-my-dog-for-nine-months>

There were tears, from both of us, but knowing this family had been reunited, 
and the sense of my son having some part in guiding events, was immensely 
comforting to me – a real Christmas gift.

• As told to Chris Broughton

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
