
Let's attempt to derive a theory of humour. Enabled by our theory, everyone 
could be funny, not just people who are actually funny. And since being funny 
is an asset - in business, in romance, when one has broken the law - it's 
hardly fair that "funny people" enjoy a monopoly.

Let's begin with animals. Which animals are funny? Not an eagle. Unless the 
eagle is wearing a top hat. And walking stiffly through a supermarket, 
muttering grumpily to itself about how the world used to be a better place. The 
addition of a top hat makes any animal funnier. Put a top hat on an already 
funny animal (a pig, say), and the effect is hilarious, especially if the pig 
topples over for no reason and can't get up. And the eagle in the top hat 
stiffly steps over the fallen pig, muttering further reactionary platitudes. 
Then the pig puts out one of its stumpy pink legs, and down goes the eagle.

Cows are funny - especially when a Ferrari zooms past. There's just something 
funny about a Ferrari zooming past a cow. The cow slowly raises its massive 
head. But the Ferrari's long gone. The cow's like, "Hey, what was that? Am I 
nuts?" But before she can really "self-interrogate" around this issue, she 
forgets about it. Because she sees that there is even more grass near where 
that first wad came from.

To elicit extra funniness from a cow: (1) denude the field in which the cow is 
standing; and (2) place a patch of lush, green grass at the top of an incline 
plane that can be coated with ice at the flip of a switch. Have the cow walk 
earnestly up the incline. Just as she reaches the grass, hit Ice On. Down she 
slides, look of consternation on her face, as she tries and fails to formulate 
language so she can invoke the Sisyphus myth, thus contextualising her 
experience. But no way is that happening.

Ducks are not funny. Not even in top hats. Ducks are just frightening - those 
plastic-looking beaks, those lifeless eyes that look through you, as if they 
know all about certain sexual sins you committed in the 80s. Jesus! Enough 
about ducks.

Elephants can be funny, if in short pants and a pince nez. A dog is funny if 
it talks like a literary theorist but then, in the middle of its lecture about 
the hegemony of mimesis, starts chasing its tail because it just can't help it. 
Cats are funny if, having just tortured and killed a mouse, a cat is given an 
exploding cigar, which blows off its top hat, and it bursts into tears, having 
just had a satori experience on the nature of suffering.

Our theory is in need of further fieldwork. If interested, go to the zoo with 
a notebook, a top hat and an open heart.
