
The white paper Success as a Knowledge Economy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/523396/bis-16-265-success-as-a-knowledge-economy.pdf>
 narrowly views higher education as an investment in human capital and 
contributor to economic growth (Editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/the-guardian-view-on-the-higher-education-white-paper-the-customer-is-always-ripe-for-fleecing>
, 17 May). Though UK universities are world-leading in teaching and research, 
it falsely asserts there is a problem of quality. Its solution? To open the 
sector to private for-profit teaching providers.

The proposed “Office for Students” is not about supporting students. “Ofstud” 
is there to ensure market competition, to enable private providers to have 
access to high tuition fees. Its board members will have “the experience of 
fostering choice and competition, and of robust financial control”.

Supposedly “at the heart of the system”, students will be short-changed. The 
Teaching Excellence Framework includes no direct measures of teaching quality. 
It is designed to facilitate fee increases, with the possibility of abolishing 
the fee cap in the future.

The government claims these arrangements will maintain quality but the history 
of for-profit higher education is littered with poor student outcomes, and with 
spending concentrated on marketing and profit-sharing. The private providers 
can do this having been relieved (by impending legislation on degree-awarding 
powers and the title of university) of the wider functions of a university.

Vice-chancellors have gone along with the conversion of public funding to a 
debt/fee model to maintain their revenues. This was always a bargain struck 
against the interest of students. Now the very idea of a university is at stake.

We call on colleagues and the wider public to speak out for the values of a 
university, of academic freedom, and of a genuine quality education for all who 
can benefit.

An alternative vision, the Alternative White Paper for HE, will be published 
next week.
Professor John Holmwood Nottingham, and Campaign for the Public University 
(CPU)
Elizabeth Lawrence Sheffield Hallam, UCU president 
Sean Wallis UCL, and UCU NEC 
Tom Hickey Brighton UCU
Rachel Cohen City, and UCU NEC elect

Professor Howard Hotson Oxford
Lee Jones Queen Mary, and CPU
Carlo Morelli Dundee, and UCU NEC
Professor Barry Smart Portsmouth and CDBU
Professor Andreas Bieler Nottingham and UCU NEC
Professor Des Freedman Goldsmiths UCU
Professor Natalie Fenton Goldsmiths UCU
Professor Gurminder K Bhambra Warwick, CPU
Jo McNeill Liverpool, and UCU NEC
Saira Weiner Liverpool John Moores, and UCU NEC
Marion Hersh Glasgow, and UCU NEC
Dr Patricia McManus Brighton, and UCU NEC
Xanthe Whittaker Leicester, and UCU NEC
Dr Lesley McGorrigan Leeds, and UCU NEC
Dr Carles Ibanez Edinburgh Napier, and EIS NEC
Sean Vernell City & Islington FE, and UCU NEC elect
Mandy Brown Lambeth College FE, and UCU NEC
Amy Jowett Hackney ACE, and UCU NEC

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
