
I have always associated smoky flavours – dried mushrooms, cured fish and 
bacon – with this time of year. It's the memory of a bonfire perhaps, the smell 
of a neighbour's burning leaves, passing a chestnut seller in the street. Maybe 
it is just the fungal smell of the city parks and countryside right now. 
Whatever it is, I find myself drawn to those dark, woodsy flavours almost as 
soon as the clocks go back.

While I have never found a better use for a rasher than in a bacon sandwich, 
there are other cuts of smoked pork that don't get such a regular outing. The 
big joints, so good when boiled and roasted, appear in my kitchen in some form 
every few months or so, but I have never thought about a bacon chop until this 
week.

The bacon chops in the supermarket are neat and small and sold without a bone. 
Fine. But ask your butcher for one and you might get something more 
interesting. A heavier chop, with a nice rim of fat. Like a fresh pork chop but 
with an earthy smokiness. It is not something they always have hanging around, 
but ask if you fancy seeing just how good this cut can be.

Because of the curing process, smoked meats can be a little drier than fresh 
meat. The moister cooking methods spring to mind. Large bacon joints can be 
simmered in water or apple juice (with carrots, onions and herbs, served up 
with a retro parsley sauce); smaller cuts like chops can be grilled well enough 
but I prefer to bake them with a little moisture such as wine or stock or 
simply the steam given off by adding vegetables to the pan and covering with a 
lid. Sit them on top of onions or cabbage and flavoured with a few aromatics 
they will keep as juicy as you could wish.

I also like to use smoked pork to flavour cheap and cheerful main course 
soups. You sometimes see off-cuts being sold at a discount, giving bean soup a 
meaty depth while keeping its quality as a low-rent supper. I have also used 
off-cuts to perk up bowls of pasta. The one that went down best last week 
involved little more than cooking small cubes of smoked bacon in a shallow pan 
with oil, quartered mushrooms and a couple of sage leaves, then adding a few 
spoons of cream. It made a quick and deeply flavoured sauce for cappelletti.

My beautiful chops from the butcher got a slow baking with shredded cabbage, 
juniper berries and a couple of sweet apples. If you don't want to bake them, 
you can do them in a pan on the hob. Keep them covered and add a glass of white 
wine or cider.

Quinces turned up in the shops again this week, looking like knobbly misshapen 
pears. My first batch of the year met their maker in a waft of orange and 
vanilla. Only the tiniest amount of sticky syrup coated their curves, but they 
were quite the most perfumed introduction to the autumn/winter season 
imaginable.

BACON CHOPS, CABBAGE AND APPLE


Serves 4

For the chops:
juniper berries 8
sea salt ½ tsp 
black peppercorns 6
thyme leaves 1 tsp
rapeseed or groundnut oil 1 tbsp
bacon chops, on or off the bone 4 



For the cabbage:
white cabbage 650g
an onion 
apples 2 medium-sized 
red wine vinegar 50ml 
brown sugar 1 tbsp
a pinch of ground mace 



Set the oven at 180C/gas mark 4. Shred the cabbage coarsely and rinse it well 
in cold water. Peel and finely slice the onion. Core the apples and cut them 
into thick slices.

Crush the juniper berries, salt, pepper and thyme leaves using a pestle and 
mortar. Mix in the oil to make a loose paste. Spread this over the surface of 
the bacon chops. Warm a little oil in a shallow pan, lower in the chops and let 
them brown very lightly. As the fat starts to colour turn and brown the other 
side. Lift the chops from the pan and set aside.

Add the sliced onion to the pan and allow it to soften for a few minutes. Put 
the apple slices in and let them colour lightly, then the shredded cabbage. Add 
the vinegar, bringing briefly to the boil, then the sugar and mace. Season very 
lightly, then cover with a lid or some kitchen foil and place in the oven. 
Leave for 20 to 25 minutes or until the cabbage has started to wilt. Return the 
chops to the pan, tucking them among the cabbage and apples. Cover and return 
to the oven for 20 minutes or till the chops are cooked through. Serve piping 
hot, with beer or cider.

QUINCES WITH ORANGE AND VANILLA

I daresay you could use pears for this, if quinces escape you. They will take 
less time to soften so I would cut the cooking time down a bit. Watch the 
quinces toward the end of the cooking time as the syrup starts to thicken. If 
it seems to be disappearing, add a splash more water. I serve these chilled 
without cream, but I have included a warm vanilla sauce for those who fancy it.

a lemon 
quinces 4 
water 1 litre
sugar 3 tbsp
an orange 
a vanilla pod



Squeeze one half of the lemon into a mixing basin half-filled with cold water. 
Peel the quinces, immediately rubbing each fruit with the other half of the 
lemon. If you fail to do this, the flesh will discolour. Cut each fruit in 
half, lowering into the acidulated water as you go.

Pour the litre of water into a saucepan, then add the sugar. Place over a high 
heat. Remove four or five strips of peel from the orange with a potato peeler. 
Drop them into the water and then add the vanilla pods. Bring to the boil.

Turn the heat down to a gentle simmer, add the quinces and partially cover 
with a lid. Leave for 30 minutes, or until the fruit is tender, checking 
regularly to make sure the syrup isn't boiling away. You want it to be thick, 
sticky and just enough to moisten the quinces, like the glaze on a fruit tart. 
Pierce one of the fruits with a skewer to check for tenderness, then remove 
from the heat. Serve warm, with a spoonful of the vanilla cream (see below), 
each fruit glistening with a little of the quince and orange glaze.

To make the vanilla cream for the quinces, warm 200ml of crème fraîche in a 
small saucepan. Scrape the seeds from half a vanilla pod and add them to the 
pan, stir in a tbsp of caster sugar and bring briefly to the boil.


Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk <mailto:nigel.slater@observer.co.uk>
 or visittheguardian.com/profile/nigelslater 
<http://theguardian.com/profile/nigelslater> for all his recipes in one place
