
My dear godson, I’ve decided that I should end all ties with you. I opened a 
door in the past few days, but your text messages have slammed it shut. You’re 
17 and maybe you won’t realise, or care, about what I am doing.

After years of pretending to have a healthy relationship with your parents – 
when I repressed my anger and frustration at their barely concealed contempt, I 
severed ties with your father (my brother) and mother, nearly two years ago. At 
the time, I texted you and said that my door was always open to you.

You never came in that door – you never even looked through the window beside 
the door. A texted “thank you” for Christmas and birthday cheques was the best 
you could muster.

I’m not sure when your father started to dislike me – perhaps when I had the 
audacity to betray my working-class background and go to college. Actually, not 
just college, university. 

I don’t think he could ever forgive me for doing something different with my 
life; rather than getting a safe, comfortable job with a nice pension in the 
local council. When he met your mother, he found the perfect partner: she 
doesn’t think out of the box either.

I don’t mean to demean them. Everyone else they know thinks they are perfectly 
fine people. You should think the same. I’m just different from them and, to be 
honest, a difficult person at the best of times. 

The funny thing is that you always talked about going to the same university 
and following the same course of studies that I did (maybe I had some influence 
in your life, somewhere?). It looked like a bridge where we could meet.

 This week I learned that you had failed to get on to that course. I thought I 
might be of some help to you: I, too, had failed to enter that course on 
my first attempt, but I persevered. I genuinely thought I could provide unique 
and helpful guidance.

You took a week to reply to my first text. Yes, it annoyed me: I was reaching 
out to you and I felt rejected, pointless … a little stupid. Then I reminded 
myself that you are just 17: stupid and selfish, just like every other teenager.

I would not give up. I tried again. I took a leap in the dark and suggested we 
meet up, something I have not done since I became estranged from your parents.

You took 24 hours to text that you did not reply earlier because you had been 
“out all day”. How many times a year do you get a message from your estranged 
uncle? And this is how you respond? You showed no enthusiasm for my help, but 
your text had the same polite formality and cold-blooded insincerity that I 
always associate with your father. Then I realised that, for better or worse, 
you have, in fact, become another version of your father.

I’m afraid I just can’t take that. We could do the fake relationship dance for 
many years to come, but I’m not good at quicksteps. I want to leave the dance 
hall now: I don’t like the music being played.

I wish you well in all you do for the rest of your life. Unfortunately, your 
life will never be a part of my life again.

Anonymous
