
It seems fitting that David Copperfield, the extravagantly coiffured master of 
illusion and trickery, opened this year’s Cannes Lionsadvertising festival 
<https://www.canneslions.com/>. In his heyday the veteran magician fooled 
viewers by appearing to make the Statue of Liberty disappear and to walk 
through the Great Wall of China.

As the world’s Mad Men descended on the French Riveria for a wine-swilling 
week of self-congratulatory award giving, many advertisers will have been 
wondering if their agencies may have subjected them to a much more sinister 
trick.

Earlier this month Cannes organisers put the final touches to a typically 
star-studded, seat-filling line-up that includesGwyneth Paltrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gwynethpaltrow> and Will Smith, the Star Trek 
cast, directors Oliver Stone and The Revenant’s Alejandro G Inarritu. 
Meanwhile, media owners including the Daily Mail booked flights for Katie 
Hopkins, Martha Stewart and Piers Morgan.

Then the Association of National Advertisers, which represents US marketers 
controlling about $200bn of annual spending, cast a shadow over the annual 
jovial and collegiate gathering of agencies and their clients when it published
a damning report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/07/report-sheds-light-on-shady-practices-in-us-media-buying-market>
 accusing swathes of the ad industry of shady dealings.

These supposedly pervasive practices line agency pockets at the expense of 
clients, through schemes such as soliciting cash rebates as kickbacks from 
media owners and dramatically marking up the cost of buying ad space.

The six biggest advertising and marketing holding companies, who control about 
60% of the $540bn global ad market, have all denied any improper behaviour. 
These big beasts are the life blood of Cannes, and its timing conveniently 
offers the gathering of agencies and clients the chance to thrash out the issue.

However, over more than a week of seminars, keynote speeches, presentations 
and networking events not a single one will tackle the $540bn elephant in the 
room.

“There is a huge issue but it’s not on the agenda at Cannes,” says Jenny 
Biggam, co-founder of independent media agency the7stars. “It would be great if 
it was. You need to decide what Cannes is for. Is it a celebration of 
creativity, as it started off? If so maybe you don’t need to have that sort of 
debate at the festival. Equally, you don’t want Cannes to look like a complete 
whitewash by ignoring the industry’s biggest issues.”

While the debate about trust between clients and agencies is set to be 
confined to extra-curricular get togethers in the bars, restaurants and 
meetings held at Cannes, the festival and its attendees do have a track record 
of confronting major issues. If the festival can adhere to that history of 
addressing industry problems, it could have a positive impact on another issue 
that has so far remained largely behind closed doors but has recently hit the 
headlines – diversity.

JWT, a subsidiary of Sir Martin Sorrell’s WPP 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/wpp>, became embroiled in a lawsuit lodged by 
a senior female executive alleging one of its top bosses repeatedly joked about 
rape and made racist comments to staff.

The action resulted in JWT’s global chief executive Gustavo Martinez resigning 
to be replaced by WPP’s chief client officer Tamara Ingram. Thehigh profile 
incident 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/28/wpp-boosts-training-following-joke-lawsuit>
 led WPP, the world’s biggest ad business, to tighten its policies and training 
around “gender, race, diversity and sensitivity”.

“All of us have to be better,” says Ingram. “Every corporation and agency 
needs to better represent its community. They need to reflect the streets 
around us. The only way to create desire and attraction for brands is to have 
the variety of communities reflected in our businesses. Diversity is also a 
moral obligation.”

At Cannes Ingram will be something of a one-woman image rehabilitation machine 
for JWT. She is introducing a discussion called Female Capital, which promises 
to “unlock the true economic value women have on businesses”, and is appearing 
in a rooftop debate organised by UK ad body the IPA, called World Wise Women, 
on the lack of female talent in creative departments of ad agencies.

According to the IPA, women account for just 27% of senior executive 
management positions in UK advertising though the industry does better in terms 
of BAME representation at 13%. Last year, Cannes launched a new Glass Lion for 
work challenging gender stereotypes in advertising, inspired by Facebook’s 
Sheryl Sandberg.

This year the festival is awash with events focusing on diversity, primarily 
concerning female representation in agencies and advertising. These include the 
Sex, Lies &Advertising <http://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> seminar 
on the responsible portrayal of women in advertising and events by the Girls’ 
Lounge movement to advance gender equality, which is backed by figures 
including Cosmopolitan editor-in-chief and Cannes regular Joanna Coles.

“Cannes can be a place to really change the face of the Mad Man,” says 
Jennifer Risi, managing director of Ogilvy Media Influence.

Beyond the growth in “worthy” causes feeding the voracious appetite of Cannes 
Lions <http://www.theguardian.com/media/cannes-lions>, which is part-owned by 
Guardian publisher GMG, things digital continue to be all the rage.

If last year was a love affair with the potential of drones, this year there 
are myriad companies and agencies offering a perspective on virtual reality.

There are also record 43,000 entries across all awards categories in 2016 but 
a look at the breakdown shows a surprising, and counter intuitive, result.

Agencies seem to have fallen out of love with digital advertising, or at least 
with bothering to enter related awards. Entries for the Cyber Lions fell by 30% 
year-on-year, by almost 1,000, to 2,886 while Mobile Lions entries remained 
flat at just over 1,200.

Philip Thomas, the chief executive of Lions Festivals, says that there are 
“ebbs and flows” with entries each year and that it is better to take a 
“long-term view”.

It could be an anomaly, or perhaps caused by the continual splitting of award 
categories; there are now also Creative Data Lions and Innovation Lions to 
cover “data and tech-led creativity”. Or could it be that the rise of 
ad-blocking has affected the amount of “traditional” digital display 
advertising being commissioned by clients, and subsequently entered for awards?

But is there something else, perhaps less tangible, going on?

According to Bruce Daisley, Twitter’s European chief, it could be down to 
something as simple as “less spirit of adventure” in the industry as clients 
take stock in a more negative global environment.

“It’s felt like a bleak year in news and it’s possible that some of this has 
fed through into the world of creativity,” says Daisley.

“There’s been an increase in the expectation of advertisers to deliver hard 
results, and return on their money, and slightly less spirit of adventure in 
the creative ambition. Don’t read this as a necessarily bad thing, brands want 
results and that’s understandable.”
