
✒Rumours reached Monkey last week of frightful problems affecting the 
computers of possibly a quarter of Telegraph staff, wiping past work and for a 
while preventing Murdoch MacLennan's minions from accessing emails – in a 
nostalgic trip back to journalism in the Ashes to Ashes era, using the phone 
was the best way for contacts and PRs to reach the seething hacks. Still, no 
problem in deciding the news agenda as long as someone could get Mail Online, 
eh?

✒Now Richard Desmond <http://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> owns 
Channel Five as well as OK!, "synergy" between his interests is expected, such 
as a focus on celebrities in Five News. But the latest issue of his celeb 
weekly suggests OK!-isation could require Natasha Kaplinsky to radically alter 
her interviewing technique. One obsessive question is mandatory, whether 
phrased as "how do you feel about Botox?" (to Tess Daly), "what's your take on 
plastic surgery?" (Julia Roberts), "You've had Botox – did you get his-and-hers 
pre-marriage procedures?" (Michelle Heaton), "would you ever have plastic 
surgery? (Emma Bunton) or the politely indirect "more and more people are 
looking to procedures such as Botox for that 'youthful' appearance ... " 
(Lulu). Scope to transform the political interview, as Kirsty Young did in '97, 
is clearly there: "How do you feel, Mr Cameron ..."

✒It is possible to be too impatient for the MediaGuardian Edinburgh 
International TV Festival to arrive: the latest issue of Broadcast, which hit 
the streets on Thursday, bears the date 28 August 2010, bang in the middle of 
the festival.

✒AA Gill's Sunday Times review of BBC4's Britain by Bike was so obnoxious 
(calling its presenter Clare Balding a "dyke on a bike" with a "muscular 
backside" ) that it provoked Balding into joining Twitter last week; there she 
fumed that Gill was a "twat" and a "bully", while receiving supportive tweets 
from, among others, Kirstie Allsopp, Caitlin Moran and Rebecca Front. So her 
roughing-up by Gill, though still understandably resented, happily had a 
positive outcome: "This is like walking into a party where all the fun people 
are", the sports anchor enthused, telling Emma Freud that "anger made me join 
but now I feelTwitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> joy".

✒There may be an upside to the BBC's latest embarrassment over next year's 
exodus to Salford, caused by MediaGuardian's revelation that Peter Salmon 
(director, BBC North) will initially only rent a place in the city he once 
enthused about as "the promised land", and the subsequent disclosure that 
Adrian van Klaveren (controller, 5 Live) will also be renting. The good news is 
talk of aBBC <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> sitcom called WeekEnders 
which would depict their bachelor-like northern weekdays as vibrant (big 
floodlit games at Old Trafford and the City of Manchester stadium, MEN Arena 
gigs, clubbing, etc) and their southern weekends en famille as suburban and 
stultifying. Ralf Little must be in contention to play the boyish Salmon, Alun 
Armstrong is ideal for Van Klaveren, and Sarah Lancashire, aka Mrs Salmon, 
could be lined up as a more dragon-like version of herself; there are 
opportunities for supporting roles for fellow-rascals Alan Yentob (Antony 
Sher), often bumped into en route to Glasgow for BBC1's Imagine, and Ed 
Stourton (Simon Russell-Beale), ditto en route to Manchester for Radio 4's 
Sunday.
