
It’s 11pm on Friday and instead of spilling out onto the pavement outside a 
pub in east London with a large glass of white wine in hand, my only tonic is 
filtered water and my whirring laptop my only company. Welcome to the world of 
freelancing. That moment of switching off on a Friday – the buzz of having a 
whole weekend to fill with fun things like food markets, brunch and a trip to 
the theatre (ie zero work) – ends when you become freelance (if you were lucky 
to have it in the first place, that is).

While a few still perceive a freelancer as someone who sleeps in till 11am and 
sits in their PJs all day until they meet up with friends for coffee, the truth 
is they’re probably working all kinds of unsociable hours to sustain their 
business. The lifestyle isn’t healthy, but the demand of paying stifling London 
rents and not knowing where your next paycheck might come from means, like many 
freelancers, I regularly have to skip hanging out with friends over the weekend 
in favour of editing copy, emailing and drumming up fresh pitches. Or more 
truthfully, chasing PRs. I could (and I probably do) spend most of the working 
day on email.


How I envy the employee with paid holidays, who can happily put on their out 
of office and jet off

There’s no 9-5 when you’re freelance. Don’t check your emails for a day and 
you could lose out on a commission. There’s always a new client to attract, an 
editor to impress, social media accounts to update, pitches to dream up and 
research, spreadsheets to update and invoices to file – and chase. Oh yes, late 
payment is the biggest headache of freelance life, with the majority of 
freelancers being paid an average of 18.5 days after their invoice due date.
They are owed an average of £5,431.03 in late payments 
<http://businessadvice.co.uk/hr/recruitment/late-payments-wreak-havoc-on-britains-freelance-economy/>
, according to a study by fintech startup Ormsby Street. Time that could be 
spent working is often spent chasing invoices.

Holidays are always tough. How I envy the employee with paid holidays, who can 
happily put on their out of office and jet off without having to check-in with 
work or take calls. For a freelancer, actually taking a holiday presents a 
dilemma and something I struggle with. After a year without a proper holiday 
and on the verge of exhaustion after six-day weeks, I booked an impromptu trip 
to Sicily last month. I filed copy early and flagged up to editors that I was 
heading away, sent off a few pitches and made sure I’d earned enough for the 
month. I promised both my partner and myself that I wouldn’t slip off from 
wandering around a piazza to go and knock out a feature; in a nutshell I would 
try to switch off.

Except, well, you can’t. Commissions come through, subs want to check your 
copy, there’s a constant flow of work calls and then, bang, an earlier than 
expected deadline comes up (which meant I did have to slink off back to the 
apartment to start researching).


The flexible lifestyle that goes hand in hand with being freelance has paved 
the way for a life full of adventure

Also, you always have to be on it because you never know if work will dry up. 
But then, like buses, work piles up. You look at your packed diary and wonder 
how the hell you’re going to hit all these deadlines. You’re working evenings, 
weekends. And while I’m very much aware that I’m not saving lives, it can be 
relentless.

It takes a certain type of character to be freelance. If I look at my diary 
now, it’s blank from the end of June. That might freak out most people out but 
I know it’ll start to look very different in the next week or two.

Sounds like a drag, doesn’t it? So why do I do it? Despite the pressures, the 
lack of holidays and the inability to switch off, I couldn’t imagine not being 
freelance. It was a rather unfriendly, micro-managing boss that spurred me to 
quit my job and join the freelance ranks all those years ago and it was the 
best thing that ever happened. The flexible lifestyle that goes hand in hand 
with being freelance, where all I need is a laptop and a phone, has paved the 
way for a life full of adventure – four months travelling around South America, 
two three-month stints in New York, another sojourn in Berlin – which simply 
couldn’t have happened with a full-time job.

And although I work long hours, it’s on my terms. When the sun burst out this 
week, I spent my lunch break swimming at London Fields lido and lying in the 
park, book in hand. Instead of visiting the gym with the post-work crowds from 
7pm, I take classes during the day. I regularly volunteer on a Tuesday. Just 
having the option (even if I don’t use it enough) to close the laptop and 
stroll to the park outside my flat means a lot.

In fact, more Brits are joining the freelance ranks. In 2015 there were 1.91 
million freelancers, a rise of 36% since 2008, according to the Association of 
Independent Professionals and the Self Employed (IPSE). “There is an increased 
desire and ability for people to be their own boss and to determine a better 
work/life balance for themselves,” explains IPSE chief executive Chris Bryce. 
“You’re not constrained to a 9-5 office environment and you don’t have to 
answer to anyone but your customers and yourself.”

However, Bryce admits there are disadvantages. “Working independently can be 
incredibly rewarding, but it is hard work, and freelancers can often face 
challenges employees don’t experience. The risk of not always being paid on 
time and having to work long hours are huge issues, and there is also the 
growing problem of being asked to work for free.” However, despite the 
pressure, he says only 2% are actively looking to switch to becoming an 
employee.

It’s certainly a lifestyle choice. While sometimes I miss the career 
progression, the pension pot, the security and the paid holidays, there’s a lot 
to be said for freedom and flexibility.

Tips on being freelance

 * Do have savings stashed away in case work dries up or you’re ill. 
 * Create a social media presence and update your profiles regularly. 
 * Network, whether on professional forums or at events. It’s good for 
creating new contacts and also for seeking out advice. 
 * Change your working environment. There are co-working spaces where you can 
rent desks daily or monthly. 
 * Take a break. It’s easy to spend 14 hours looking at your screen. Regularly 
get up and take a walk. 
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
