
University employers have attempted to play down the impact of a two-day 
strike by lecturers, and have urged staff taking industrial action to 
reconsider what they described as their final offer.

The Universities and Colleges Employers Association <http://www.ucea.ac.uk/> 
(UCEA) said member institutions were confident the strike, which began on 
Wednesday, would cause minimal disruption and reassured students facing 
end-of-year exams there would be “no to low” impact.

Members of the University and College Union <https://www.ucu.org.uk/> are 
taking industrial action after talks to resolve a dispute over a 1.1% pay offer 
collapsed last week.

Related: Lecturers are striking against low-paid, casual work, which hurts 
students too | Nina Power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/25/lecturers-striking-low-pay-casual-work-students-university>

In addition to the two-day walkout, the UCU is warning that further action in 
coming weeks could disrupt graduation ceremonies, open days and the university 
clearing process. There are also plans for a boycott of the setting and marking 
of students’ work to begin in the autumn.

Striking staff posted pictures on Twitter of picket lines at universities up 
and down the country amid numerous expressions of support, but a UCEA 
spokesperson said universities were expecting little or no disruption.

“Our HE institutions tell us that they anticipate minor impact and minimal 
student disruption from UCU’s planned strike days this week,” said the 
spokesperson. “They know that the vast majority of their staff understand the 
current funding environment and can see that the final offer, with substantial 
extra for the lower paid, endeavours to be fair without putting additional jobs 
at risk.

“HE institutions overwhelmingly tell us they are anticipating ‘no to low’ 
impacts on both days. Even for examinations, which are still taking place at 
some HE institutions, more than nine out of 10 report that a ‘no to low impact’ 
is anticipated.”

The UCU said the value of university staff pay had declined in real terms by 
14.5% since 2009. The union is also concerned about the increasingly insecure 
nature of employment in universities, with 75,000 staff on casualised 
contracts, and the continuing gender inequality in pay, with a male member of 
staff earning on average 12.6% more than a female one.

The UCU’s general secretary, Sally Hunt, has dismissed the 1.1% pay offer as 
“an insult” in the context of university vice-chancellors receiving a 5.1% 
increase in pay and benefits last year.

“Members have made it clear that they won’t tolerate a continued squeeze on 
their income, pay inequality and the increasing job insecurity blighting the 
sector,” she said.

“It’s time to invest properly in the teachers, researchers and administrators 
who are the backbone of our universities. Industrial action which impacts on 
students is never taken lightly, but members feel that they have been left with 
no alternative.

“If the employers wish to see a swift end to this dispute and avoid further 
disruption they need to come back to the table with a much improved offer.”

The UCU said later it was getting reports of strong picket lines across the 
country, with more support expected tomorrow and plans for 13 city-based 
rallies.


Hunt, who was due to address a rally in Manchester on Wednesday, said: “We are 
getting reports of really solid support from picket lines across the UK. It is 
a disgrace that the employers’ intransigence over pay and conditions for 
university staff has forced us out on strike.


“We hope universities will now come back to us with a decent offer and we can 
avoid further disruption.”

As well as the two-day strike, protests are planned in cities around the UK, 
with rallies in Belfast, Cambridge, Glasgow, Leeds, Manchester and Sheffield, 
among others. The shadow chancellor,John McDonnell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, is expected to speak at a 
London rally.

Employers described the industrial action as “disappointing given the very 
good pay offer, plus the joint work on gender pay and casual employment that is 
on the table”.

The UCEA spokesperson said: “We would like to see UCU consulting its members 
on the final offer rather than seeking to take action that could damage 
institutions and harm their students.”

Unite <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite>, which has about 12,000 
members in the higher education sector, said it was consulting on the 
possibility of joining the action. A ballot closes on 6 June. The Unite 
national officer, Mike McCartney, said: “We are calling on Unite members to 
reject the offer on the table. They have seen their pay slashed over recent 
years, while many university bosses are raking in more than the prime minister.

“Clearly there is unfairness in the pay system and that hurts our members, who 
are mainly technicians, porters and cleaning staff without whom universities 
would not function. These are the workers who are the key to providing a good 
student experience.”




