
Fashion loves a road trip, apparently. Alexa Chung and Poppy Delevingne are 
the latest to pack their bags, in a shoot and video for Net-a-porter's magazine,
The Edit <http://www.net-a-porter.com/magazine/254/8>, which follows similar 
outings from French and British Vogue. A few themes become apparent. Yes, there 
are strict rules for the fashion road trip. Flout them at your peril.

1. Have a blonde and brunette pairing – preferably BFFs

Alexa and Poppy in The Edit, Langley and Dree Hemingway in British Vogue … 
whatever you do, be sure to have these contrasting hair colours in the car. 
Because the fashion road trip (FRT) requires a lot of lying around bonding, and 
a blonde and brunette gives the best contrast for the picture.

2. America is your destination (appropriate for 4 July)
 Convertible? Check. Perfect hair at odds with convertible? Check. 
French Vogue aside – the Anastasia Barbieri shoot is titled "Un Weekend" 
<http://www.studded-hearts.com/2014/04/vogue-paris-may-2014-edita-andreea/> – 
the good ol' US of A is the only place to do a road trip, because Alexa Chung 
says so in the video for The Edit. Backing this up, Francesca Burns' British 
Vogue shoot has American royalty – the Hemingway clan – as models. And a ranch.

3. Thelma and Louise is your reference point

It's irresistible, right? The 1991 movie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PRr0HY9MPZ0> road trip classic has been subtly 
referenced by all FRTs since then (except in endings, obviously). Just look at 
the retro wheels in these shoots – all nods to the 60s Thunderbird that the two 
runaways use. Forget the Ford Focus rental car; convertibles are the only way 
to drive.

4. Location, location, location
 Erm, babes, you're totally in my shot 
You need wheat fields and rugged countryside, and the beach is crucial, obvs. 
Though we're not talking tropical. The FRT is more about a deserted stretch of 
sand on which its adventurers can wander. French Vogue even have their models 
lounging in a spare boat they found somewhere.

5. Think 'this old thing?' style – the kind of clothes you chuck in a suitcase

The FRT style needs to look thrown together – you're a free spirit out on the 
open road, after all. Think denim, khaki, fringing, plaid, a vintage treasure 
from the back of your wardrobe. And flat shoes – probably worn with socks. This 
is fashion on holiday, remember.
