
The name says it all. These gardens on the south coast of Cornwall had once 
been a thriving country estate, but went into decline after the first world 
war. In 1990, restoration began and now it is possible to get an idea of what a 
Victorian estate may have looked like. As the writer John Fowles put it, 
Heligan is "the almost archaeological resurrection of a concept, a way of life".

There is much to see in what amounts to some 20 acres of cultivated land. The 
northern gardens around the house consist of a productive area and "pleasure 
grounds", which include various aristocratic distractions such as an enclosed 
Italianate garden. From here, the estate slopes coastwards towards the town of 
Mevagissey; the highlight is the 10-acre jungle garden (above). The combination 
of a south-facing valley and mild Cornish climate makes this perfect for 
exotics.

A moving reminder of the upheaval of the early 20th century appears on the 
"thunderbox" in the melon garden. Here, on the eve of war in August 1914, a 
number of staff scribbled their names on the wall. Of the 15 gardeners who 
worked at Heligan that summer, some of whose names appear on the wall, at least 
eight were killed on the battlefields of France. Open all year (01726 845100;
heligan.com <http://www.heligan.com>). 

The garden has one of the country's largest collections of slow-growing tree 
ferns. If you are buying one for your garden, make sure it has certification to 
say it has come from a sustainable source.

Most of Heligan is an exact replica of the original. The jungle garden, 
however, is the exception. Initially, it consisted largely of bamboo, but it 
has evolved to include introductions such as Canna iridiflora.

A jungle garden relies mainly on leaf shapes and textures for its effect. 
However, there are splashes of colour from plants such as ginger, cannas and 
astilbe.

A series of spring-fed ponds provides the perfect conditions for bog-loving 
Gunnera manicata. In winter, this monster dies back; its leaves are broken off 
and piled on top of the crown to protect it from frost.

According to Heligan, a popular plant with visitors is the skunk cabbage. 
Presumably this is because of its yellow flowers in early spring and not its 
smell, which explains its common name.
