
As summer ends, I find myself feeling sentimental about American summers past: 
long afternoons at the beach, fireworks above a baseball stadium, eating hot 
dogs at the State fair, getting my first kiss on a suburban porch while lawn 
sprinklers hissed. But, of course, life is never simple. There are also the 
more complicated summertime memories: having my leg nearly bitten off by a 
shark at the beach, eating so many hot dogs during my shark-bite-rehab that I 
soon weighed 400lbs, having one of the fireworks land in my hair because I was 
too fat to run away, finding out my girlfriend (Vivian) was having an affair 
with an ageing auto parts salesman because "at least he can fit through the 
doorway of my house and has non-singed hair".

Life's a mixed blessing, isn't it? You have good times and bad times. You've 
got to keep your chin up and look on the bright side while letting a smile be 
your umbrella and keeping on the sunny side of the street. There's a beautiful 
pendulum quality to life: just when I'd given up hope, everything got good 
again. I lost weight; the auto parts salesman died in a train wreck; the shark 
swam ashore, learned to breathe oxygen and apologised; and I won a $10m 
settlement from the fireworks firm, and bought an incredibly realistic-looking 
wig. Then I tempted Vivian back by buying her jewels, a huge mansion, and - the 
final irony - the baseball team we'd been watching when my hair caught fire.

Was I happy? I was. I'd learned a valuable lesson: things always turn out well 
for me, because I am favoured by God, even preferred by Him, and outshine, in 
His eyes, all other creatures, great and small.

Yet one mustn't get complacent. No sooner had Vivian and I married and settled 
into our mansion, than the auto parts salesman came back from the grave and 
stole her away, to a gated "undead" community. I was so heartbroken, I stopped 
eating and soon weighed only 15lbs. I looked ridiculous in my new wig: like a 
letter "I" over which someone had draped a shag carpet, or else a very thin guy 
from the 60s. Plus I couldn't get rid of the shark, who, turns out, was not a 
great white shark after all, but a clingy insecure shark, always trying to get 
me to compliment his bite radius and so on.

These days I make quite a sight: thin guy, huge wig, flinching whenever anyone 
sets off a firecracker, standing (with his man-eating, killing machine of a 
friend, who's always asking if his fin looks fat), outside the gate of the 
undead community, hoping for a glimpse of Vivian, longing for autumn to begin, 
so I can put these painful summer memories behind me.
