
In March, a poll found 
<http://globalnews.ca/news/2569893/19-of-americans-would-consider-moving-to-canada-if-trump-becomes-u-s-president-ipsos-poll/>
 that nearly 20% of Americans would consider moving to Canada if a Trump 
presidency comes to pass. Well, the dream doesn’t have to be mere fantasy any 
longer. A new company has arrived that intends to help whisk the country’s 
jaded abroad.

Maple Match <http://maplematch.com> is a matchmaking service like none other. 
In the words of its website, it “makes it easy for Americans to find the ideal 
Canadian partner to save them from the unfathomable horror of a Trump 
presidency”. The app, in other words, wants to help Trump-averse singles find 
love – and perhaps a new country to call home. At the moment, eager singles can 
sign up for early access when the dating app launches properly. And when it 
does, many thousands of unhappy Americans and generous Canadians will be paired.

Related: President Trump fills world leaders with fear: 'It's gone from funny 
to really scary' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/28/donald-trump-president-world-leaders-foreign-relations>

The service’s founder is Joe Goldman, a 25-year-old education research and 
budding entrepreneur based in Austin, Texas. A self-described man of “liberal 
persuasions” living in a red state, Goldman says he has a natural affinity for
Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> and its progressive leftwing 
image. Maple Match is a manifestation of his dual passions: connecting 
different people and his neighbors to the north. “When this election came about 
and I started seeing Donald Trump and the rise of his candidacy I started 
getting concerned, just like anybody else,” he said. “I thought it might be 
interesting to try something like this out.”

At first his ambitions were modest: “Last week I had a hundred page views and 
I thought that was a great – I made a hundred people smile.” But then virality 
transformed Maple Match into an international craze. Last Friday, Maple Match 
was getting 200 sign-up requests an hour. Today nearly 5,000 singles have 
signed up for Maple Match – and the app hasn’t even launched.

Today nearly 5,000 singles have signed up for Maple Match – and the app hasn’t 
even launched

Goldman has attracted Americans and Canadians alike – the former hoping to get 
out of the US and the latter glad to harbor them. Maple Match has been fielding 
all sorts of desperate pleas. “Please help me,” a 22-year-old American writes 
on his Maple Match application. “I found out my parents are voting for Trump 
and it literally broke my heart.” “I want to meet an American woman who 
disapproves of Trump,” writes one Canadian. “She must be willing to become a 
hockey fan and eat maple syrup and Beaver Tails in my igloo.”

Adriana Floridia, a 23-year-old single woman living in Toronto, told me that 
she thinks Maple Match sounds like a nice idea. “Maybe this is a chance for 
people to finally meet their soulmates,” she said. Goldman thinks this is the 
right attitude. “This is about finding the right partner and not caring if 
they’re on the other side of the border,” he said. “If that person happens to 
be from Nunavut or Nebraska, great. You should go to a place where you’ll be 
happy. For a number of Americans, in the event of a Trump presidency, that 
place would be Canada.”

Related: Blame Canada? US Senate committee ponders if northern border is a 
threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/us-senate-committee-questions-candadian-border-threat>

The gag-like aspect of the Maple Match premise has of course aided its ascent 
to global virality. But Goldman insists that the men and women who have so far 
signed up think of this as much more than a fleeting joke. “Americans are using 
this as a serious opportunity to meet Canadians. People have been sending me 
paragraphs of explanation. People have been sending me pictures of themselves. 
I’ve had people begging me to start this. We’re not just building an anti-Trump 
app. We’re building something that connects people across borders, and that’s 
something that has the potential to grow.”

Right now it seems the only hurdle is if Trump’s aspirations don’t come to 
fruition. Will Maple Match connect Americans with Canadians if Americans have 
no good reason to abscond? “It’s funny thinking that if Trump goes away there 
will be no more Maple Match,” Goldman said. “But while the humor is there to 
generate attention, what will ultimately interest people is their passion for 
finding someone who means something to them.” And Goldman believes that desire 
will endure even if the Democrats happen to win.

“This site shows that a lot of people are frustrated with the current dating 
options,” he saids. “A lot of Americans really want to meet Canadians. They’re 
looking for something new and something better.”
