
Lydia, who's nine, says: "We've nearly sorted out your wedding." And indeed we 
have. Only a few things remain. For most of them there's a website to help us. 
Not sure what music to walk up the aisle to? There are pages of lists – Moon 
River is popular but what about Abba's I do, I do, I do? "What about here comes 
the bride, all fat and wide, you'll have to break the church down to get her 
inside?" says Lydia.

"I don't like Wagner," I say.

"Isn't he on The X Factor?" asks Lydia.

I spend the weekends mopping up outstanding business. The florist has asked me 
to pop in to finalise plans. When I go in there's a couple in front of a large 
floral arrangement taking pictures of it from all angles and discussing the 
shape and colour of the flowers with real intensity. I'm carrying baby Flora, 
who is a substantial weight, and wonder how much there is to say about a flower 
display.

"It's beautiful," I say, because it is.

The bride-to-be, who looks young enough to be my daughter, smiles at me in 
that why don't you mind your own business sort of way.

"Well, come back in the new year and think whether we can work together," says 
my florist, airily, to that young woman.

Maybe it's because baby Flora is trying to eat some expensive flowers, but it 
takes me a nanosecond to "work" with my florist. "Ivory roses for the bouquets 
and red roses for the tables?"

"Yes that will be fine," I say, shutting the door behind me.

"Are you getting excited?" a friend asks. In truth, I'm still surprised to 
find myself getting married – much as I was to find myself expecting baby 
Flora. But as the wedding gets closer it becomes more life affirming. 
Everyone's so pleased for you that it's infectious.

When someone tells me they thought of getting married but it reduces your 
state pension, I realise we haven't thought of the financial implications. And 
it's stupid but I'm glad.

There are little reminders of why we should have got married before. I take my 
mother to get her hair cut and coloured, and she is immediately transformed. 
"Do you like it?" I ask.

She peers into the mirror until she is barely two inches away. "I can't see 
it," she says.

Later that evening she points out to J that Flora's fallen asleep in her donut 
ring (a soft round cushion with a hole in it). "It wasn't Flora, it was her 
teddy," J tells me.

I feel terrible that I didn't get married when my mother was able to see me 
properly. But then I remember she was never that keen on marriage (which is 
probably where my reticence comes from). She would, however, want to see her 
grandchildren in their finery. The girls are all kitted out; Flora chose her 
dress by lungeing and dribbling on it. Sam needs a suit, but first I'm keen – 
control freak that I am – to get him to shave off his fluffy beard and cut his 
hair.

"I need hair clippers," he says, so we go to get some.

There are cheap ones and there are deluxe ones. "You'll get your money back 
because you'll never need to pay for a haircut for me again," he says.

" I shouldn't have to pay for a haircut for you now," I say stiffly.

We get home and Sam reappears 10 minutes later, clean shaven and with a decent 
haircut.

I feel ridiculously proud of how lovely he's made himself look. So proud that 
I give him some money to go out with friends. Weddings may not be cheap, but I 
realise they are very good for families.
