
Q I have started Christmas shopping early this year. I'm worried about buying 
clothes as gifts, though, because the 28-day return period will have expired. 
What do you think I should do?
Philippa

A Don't panic - many of the major clothes shops have thought of this, too. If 
you shop at French Connection, you can ask the cashier to validate your receipt 
for after the Christmas period and they'll extend it to the beginning of 
January. Gap offers gift receipts which enable you to exchange an unwanted 
present, or if your receipt is more than 30 days old they'll offer you a credit 
note redeemable in any Gap store. Marks & Spencer give you a generous 90 days 
to take back a gift - if you have the receipt you can get a refund or credit 
note. From now on, before you buy anything check with each retailer that the 
return date can be extended or that you can get a gift receipt. Congratulations 
on starting your shopping early, by the way!

Q I hate wearing dresses and skirts. Can you suggest some alternative 
glamorous eveningwear?
Kerry

A I'm a big fan of the tuxedo. Whether it's black or white, basing your 
evening look on such an iconic item always looks good. And nothing turns heads 
quite like a sexy, well-tailored suit. You'll find the tux suit available at 
many different prices, and in everything from wool to satin and velvet. If you 
won the lottery yesterday, then head to YSL - this season's tuxedo is divine. 
If not, then try Kate Moss at Topshop or Joseph. Luckily, we've moved on from 
the Eighties look of the lacy bra popping out from a barely buttoned 
single-breasted jacket. I suggest you wear your tux with a vest or sparkly 
camisole; though if you're looking for an ultra-elegant look, a lady-like 
chiffon blouse with a tie-neck is stunning. On trouser length, I tend to favour 
an ankle-skimming black trouser, which allows you to show off your exquisite 
stilettos. Alternatively, go for a wide-legged Marlene Dietrich style - Cos has 
a fab pair in black velvet. Whichever style you choose, you'll stand out from 
the crowd.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
