
Over the last few years, technological innovation has transformed the world of 
transportation. It is now the tech companies that are developing the latest 
trends in our cars. Self-driving vehicles are the next big thing, spearheaded 
by the large corporations in the US, such as Google and Microsoft. But there is 
innovation happening much closer to home. Apple are reportedly creating their 
own car in Berlin, and other businesses in the UK are also trialling the 
technology.

Britain wants to be at the forefront of autonomous driving and the businesses 
involved have benefited from an increase in government investment into the 
scientific and engineering sectors in this country. The breakthroughs have not 
been insignificant. This summer, there are car trials running throughout the 
country and we’re not far away from tests being run on the roads.

But what has led to the development of self-driving cars in the UK and how is 
it being advanced here?


Government support

The government’s Intelligent Mobility Fund 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/driverless-cars-technology-receives-20-million-boost>
 has provided millions of pounds in support of growing the technology for 
self-driving cars. This investment is financing the development of everything 
from autonomous shuttles to carry visually-impaired passengers, to new 
simulation trials for autonomous pods. Big cities including London, Milton 
Keynes, Bristol and Coventry are all trialling their own versions.

Business Secretary Sajid Javid says: “Our cars of the future will be equipped 
with the technologies that will make getting from A to B safer, faster, and 
cleaner. They will alert drivers of accidents ahead and be able to receive 
information from their surroundings about hazards, increasing the safety of 
drivers, passengers and pedestrians.”

Safer and more efficient 

Google has been putting its self-driving cars through rigid safety tests to 
ensure they can be trusted on the roads. A slow-speed collision with abus in 
Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/mar/09/google-self-driving-car-crash-video-accident-bus>
this year – the first incidence of a crash involving a self-driving car – 
generated new criticism of the technology and its decision making ability.

In London, the Greenwich Automated Transport Environment (GATEway) is 
conducted a number of trials to see how automated vehicles fare in urban 
environments. The project aims to accelerate the take-up of driverless cars and 
identify potential risk areas and challenges to further the development of the 
technology in the UK.

GATEway’s trials will include an automated shuttle transport on the Greenwich 
peninsula and autonomous valet parking of cars, enabling users to exit their 
vehicle while it finds a specified parking space autonomously. The hope is 
that, once on the road, self-driving cars with this ability will cut down on 
queuing times and reduce the number of accidents happening in urban areas.

Zero emission

At one of the world’s busiest airports – London Heathrow – Personal Rapid 
Transit systems have been in place since 2011. They are free to ride from 
Terminal 5’s business parking lots, and take the passenger directly to their 
chosen station. They are also electrical, autonomous pods, with zero emissions 
and are therefore preferable to the multiple hopper buses that the airport used 
to use. There are more planned for other UK cities, including Birmingham.

Companies need to improve the understanding and industry perception of the 
benefits of self-driving cars before they become widely used. There is also 
still more testing to do, including the cars’ capabilities on urban roads, 
motorways, the market’s readiness and new UX tools still need to be fully 
investigated. Once this is done, there are plenty of manufacturers who will 
begin to produce self-driving vehicles.

Kia hopes to hopes to introduce the brand’s first partially autonomous car to 
the roads by 2020 and first fully autonomous car by 2030. Autonomous features, 
such as active cruise control and Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) 
already exist – theDrive Wise <http://kia-buzz.com/drive-wise-features/> 
initiative was unveiled at the Consumer Electronics Show (CES) earlier this 
year.

Driverless cars are on the way. Make sure that you think about how they could 
help your business, whether you manage a fleet or not.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
