
A leading Brexit minister has claimed that immigration could “overwhelm” 
Britain, arguing that her constituents complain about not hearing English 
spoken when they walk down the high street.

Andrea Leadsom, the energy minister, said she believed that immigration had 
enriched society until 2002, when easternEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> countries acceded to the EU and 
their citizens were able to move and work in the UK.

“It’s the speed and the volume and the inability to hit the ground running,” 
she said. “If you come here and you don’t speak English, and you don’t know the 
customs and you don’t know where to live and you don’t have a job – It’s really 
difficult for everybody. It’s really difficult to make you welcome.”
Referendum explained: polling 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=current_polling>
In an interview with the Guardian, Leadsom also said she believed there was a 
“shy Brexit” phenomenon caused by remain supporters making their opponents out 
to be “anti-European”.

Leadsom is one of the most visible campaigners for a leave vote, appearing 
alongside Boris Johnson and Gisela Stuart in last week’s ITV debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-our-panel-on-boris-johnson-and-nicola-sturgeons-tv-debate>
. The MP for South Northamptonshire was economic secretary to the Treasury 
before taking on her current brief.


She also said that a Treasury warning of recession was “barely credible” – 
triggering an angry response from the remain camp, which accused the minister 
of making a shameful argument.

A spokesman for Britain Stronger in Europe also attacked the minister for 
“resorting to ever-more alarmist rhetoric about immigration”.

“People’s concerns about immigration are not going to be solved by wrecking 
our economy, which experts agree is what will happen if we leave the EU,” he 
said.

Leadsom said that she did not believe there would be a recession or that 
people would be worse off. She also insisted that she was pro-European.

“My family lived in Portugal for 10 years, I love the Germans, I love Swedish 
food, I speak French. I love Europe,” she said. “What I hate is the EU and the 
way it is destroying such a fabulous continent.”

The minister argued that there was now a “fundamental problem” with 
immigration. “In my own area of Northamptonshire, people write to me saying: ‘I 
walk down the shopping street in Northampton and I don’t hear any English 
spoken’,” said Leadsom.

The minister said she wrote back to argue that perhaps the people could speak 
English but were talking to their friends in their first language. “I’m trying 
to be very fair to them,” she added.

Leadsom argued that a positive story about immigration was the way that 
Europeans working in Pret a Manger always spoke in English. “They say: 
‘Morning, what would you like?’ in a cheery way,” she said.

“We absolutely fabulously integrate as a society but not if you overwhelm us.”

She suggested that the families of newer immigrants would become more settled 
over time, saying: “The half a million mums who are EU-born who are giving 
birth every year in the UK, those babies grow up speaking English and thinking 
they are British.”

Leadsom added she was furious about the claims of remain supporters over the 
economy, saying that a recession was unlikely.

“I’m disgusted at the way the Treasury has behaved to have taken such an 
extraordinarily partial view and to pretend something like a 0.1% [downturn], 
which is utterly within any rounding or margin of error, and to claim this 
massive thing,” she said.

“I think they used the word ‘technical’ recession because they knew it was 
barely even credible to call it that.”
