
One of the tricks of the trade as a weekly columnist is "the Idea Notebook" - 
a small book, carried at all times, into which you record column ideas. When in 
a fix - under a tight deadline, say, the Guardian breathing down your neck, 
even though they know perfectly well you're in the throes of a nasty mid-life 
crisis, conducting five extramarital affairs at once, having somehow become 
addicted to a certain chemical in dental floss that can be extracted only by a 
lengthy process involving some very expensive equipment, which one had to 
smuggle into one's basement because one's wife is an officer in the drug 
enforcement division - well, one simply turns to the old Idea Notebook.

Today I'm going to allow you a look into my Idea Notebook. Here's a spiffy 
little idea for a column: "Who would win if canary fought small dog?" Or how 
about this: "Briefly summarise state of particle physics debate. String theory 
really fading? Make funny! Include recent research on so-called Parallel Space 
Dichotomy, w/ equations." Here's one I've always wanted to do, just for reasons 
of nostalgia: "Viciously excoriate all ex-girlfriends. Incl. their current home 
phone numbers." I've tried this next one a few times, but it always runs a bit 
long: "Prove by syllogism that evil always present in good, and vice versa."

One of the problems with the Idea Notebook is that, in the heat of 
inspiration, one sometimes writes down a wonderful idea, only to find later 
that it makes no sense. For example: "Astronomy + clowns. Colonoscopy riff. End 
with fish reference." Or this - what the heck could I have meant? "Let Heather, 
Kathy, Sue down easy. Keep Melody + Amber. They are simply too hot to lose! 
Note to self: Buy add'l floss! Does it come in industrial-size boxes? God, how 
I love a good floss-buzz!"

Ah, creativity, truly thy name is Mystery! 

Some ideas are simply too personal to interest a general readership: "Why have 
I always disliked the shape of my XXX?" "Things I would talk to Madonna about 
if I ever met Madonna." "That one dealie-bob I thought about the other day in 
that elevator or poss. it was at cafe?"

But every so often I get it right. Watch for these: "Column about shrimp, ie 
shrimp = creepy." "Make case that Mickey Mouse = Bush, Donald Duck = Cheney." 
"Funny riff about man entering throes of death with guilty conscience vis-a-vis 
his behaviour re. drugs + his marriage."

Some ideas, alas, would require more chutzpah than I have, ie an entry I made 
only last night: "Write entire column by just listing random contents of Idea 
Notebook."
