
1 Will you charge:

A Top-up fees across the board maximum (£3,000)

B A flat rate for all courses below £3,000. (If so, what is it)

C Different rates for different courses.(If so,please specify range - ie 
minimum/maximum)

"Fees are a very crude measure of this particular initiative; it is really 
about the whole circumstances of students. It is not about the fee, but the 
level of bursary available for students."

2 If you are varying fees will they be:

A Lower for Sciences 

B Lower for Arts/Humanities/social sciences

C Lower for foundation degrees

D Lower for vocationally-focused degrees

E A combination, please state (areas or specific courses)

3 Are you introducing bursaries?

A Yes

B No

4 How much for?

"We are not concentrating on the headline figure, we are looking at where the 
maximum advantage can be secured for students. We could help with materials to 
support students' work - not just money to help their studies."

5 If yes, will they be:

A Targeted at the most needy students

B Targeted at subjects which are short of students

C A mixture, please detail

6 If yes, are they funded

A From central university funds

B From a benefactor, private donations, etc?

C A mixture?

7 Have you employed outside agencies to help you make the decision (market 
researchers/brand managers)?

A Yes

B No

8 Where will you spend the extra income?

A Better student facilities

B Better academic facilities

C Better academic pay

D Bursaries

E Bumping up research capacity

F Other, please state

I think the net gain will be rather more modest than headline figure suggest

9 Will top-up fees provide enough extra income for the university for the 
foreseeable future?

A Yes

B No

"Top up fees will only help at margin. If you are seeing a reduction or 
moderation of public funding, all you are doing is shifting the costs from one 
source to another. We are entering a quasi-market system that is totally 
untested and lacks knowledge. We are going to go through troubled two or three 
years. There is not going to be a lot of material benefit in first two or three 
years."

10 How long do you expect the limit on top-up fees to remain at £3,000?

A 1-3 years

B 4-6 years

C 7-10 years

D Over 10 years

11 Do you think top-up fees will put less well-off students off going to 
university?

A Yes

B No 

"For students whose family experience with higher education is limited they 
will be dissuaded; however well intentioned the repayment schedule. There is a 
lot of work to be done so those people do not feel dissuaded, with a concerted 
effort by the sector."

12 How do you think Offa will affect your attempts to widen participation?

A Help

B Hinder

C Have no effect

D Undecided
