
'Look at that bumper sticker," says Tilly, who's 11. "It says 'No stealing. 
The government doesn't like competition.'" She doesn't ask what it means, so I 
assume she knows. I wonder if my younger children will grow up being more 
political than the older ones, born in a time of plenty. I certainly feel like 
I'm being robbed. I read last week that anyone who has a child of pre-school 
age today will pay £120,000 to get them through university.

So much for me retiring as baby Flora starts secondary school. Now my 60s will 
be spent working to pay for her higher education. And to support my other 
children who are likely to be jobless (and welfare-less) throughout their 
working lives. The world is looking grim and I feel anxious that I've brought 
five children into it.

"It'll all be fine again by the time Flora's 18," says a friend. "But we'll 
all have dementia by then and won't be able to appreciate it."

The recession is a stranger to Lydia, as we discover in her letter to Santa. 
We've agreed that although he may not exist, we'll pretend and the letter helps 
us to find out what she wants. She does, however, have an irritating habit of 
swearing blind she wants something in November that she has no interest in by 
December.

"Shh," she says, as I point this out. "Don't say anything about who buys the 
presents in front of Flora."

Lydia reads out her list. "Dear Santa, as I have been a very good girl this 
year ... " J and I snort, largely because she expects it. "Could I have Just 
Dance 2, a handbag and the DVD of Harry Hill's TV Burp Gold 3?"

So far it's not nearly as unrealistic as last year's list, which included a 
pony.

J leans over her shoulder.

"What's this?" he asks. "Money – £50 plus – a Sky Box, a Blu-ray DVD player 
and an agent [some of Lydia's classmates have agents]. And you've put at the 
bottom: 'Things may be added later.'"

"You don't even know what a Blu-ray DVD player is," I say.

"I know they're good," she says. "We're already kick-starting the economy 
single-handedly by getting married," I say. "Christmas will be modest this 
year."

"Well, whatever it is, I'm not doing any shopping in Marks & Spencer," says 
Lydia. "X's mum fainted in there yesterday."

In keeping with the theme of austerity, I watch A Christmas Carol with the 
bigger girls while J looks after Flora. We sit on my bed eating popcorn. Each 
time I reach for the popcorn they tell me off. "Stop, Mum," says Tilly firmly. 
"You're getting married. You're meant to be on a diet."

"Popcorn isn't fattening," I say.

"It is if you take handfuls of it," says Tilly. "You don't want to be Dick do 
you?"

Dick, it turns out, is German for fat. How her class roared when their teacher 
wrote it on the board. "I'll fit into my dress even if I eat all the popcorn."

Lydia looks alarmed, but it's not about the popcorn. "For the wedding you need 
to have something old, something new, something borrowed, something blue," she 
says. "You don't have them, do you?"

I tell her that I already have something borrowed – a beautiful necklace a 
friend lent me (suspecting, like Lydia, that I hadn't got this sorted out). 
"I'm not buying anything else," I say definitively.

"The dress is new and you can have your toenails painted blue," says Lydia and 
she pauses. "I know what you can have for the old bit that won't cost anything 
– Dad."
