
Snapshot: My father and the Youth Railway

My father, Lewis H Burgess, isn't in this photograph because he's the man 
behind the lens. But this photo means more to me than any in which my father 
appears because it says something about him, and the things he believed in – 
things I believe in too. It was taken in the summer of 1947, near to the 
Sarajevo to Samac railway line, which he and his fellow volunteers were helping 
to build.

The "youth railway" attracted thousands of idealistic young people from across 
Europe who were anxious to play a part in the rebuilding of Yugoslavia, which 
was devastated by the war. I have many of my father's photos of the youth 
railway, but this is my favourite because everyone is laughing. I bet they're 
laughing at one of my father's terrible jokes – he always told one before 
taking family snaps.

The man sitting in the front row on the far right is Edward (EP) Thompson, the 
great social historian. Like my father, after service in the British army he 
went on to study at Cambridge. My father was the son of a postman, whereas 
Thompson's was an Oxford academic. None the less, Thompson would later become 
my intellectual hero as an iconoclastic socialist and author ofThe Making of 
the English Working Class 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140136036>
. The man at the back with a bush hat isAlfred Sherman 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/aug/29/guardianobituaries.conservatives>, 
Republican machine gunner during the Spanish civil war, who would become an 
arch critic of communism and the architect of Thatcherism, but at that time was 
my father's friend.

Family legend has it that the cartoonist Ronald Searle 
<http://www.ronaldsearle.co.uk/> is also in this photograph but I have never 
been able to identify him. However, perhaps more interesting for those of us 
who can remember the 1970s, the photo includes the notorious Labour MPJohn 
Stonehouse 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/december/24/newsid_2540000/2540557.stm>
 who, my father admitted to me, he never really took to. My father was not 
malicious but he hugely enjoyed the scandal when Stonehouse's clothes were 
found discarded on a beach and he was later arrested by Australian detectives 
believing him to be Lord Lucan. The fact that Stonehouse waslater outed as a 
Soviet spy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/dec/30/margaret-thatcher-spying-john-stonehouse>
 only served to confirm my father's low opinion of the man. I think Stonehouse 
is the man with the beard sitting next to Alfred Sherman, in the back row.

Building the railway left in my father a deep sense of the capacity of 
ordinary people to work together to shape the world for the better. Brought up 
in Bolton between the wars, opportunities were limited. None the less, his 
older brother made it to the local grammar school and my father, having passed 
the 11-plus, deserved to go too. However, the headmaster made it clear to my 
grandparents that one boy from a working-class family at the school was enough 
and my father ended up at the municipal boys' school.

My father entered sixth form knowing that on matriculation his parents 
expected him to take a job and bring home a wage. But the war changed 
everything. Clement Atlee's government gave university grants to bright young 
working-class men with war service and, six weeks after demob, my father 
entered Cambridge to study economics.

After a lifetime spent in journalism and education, my father died in 1989. I 
regret that I never got round to asking him about the other people in the 
photograph. I would love to know who they were. If their stories are half as 
interesting as my father's, they deserve to be told.Peter Burgess

Playlist: Catherine, stand close to me

Bring on the Night by the Police <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PuFAYAEgKMA> 

"The afternoon has gently passed me by / The evening spreads its sail against 
the sky"

I remember during the late 70s, early 80s, as a 10-year-old asthmatic and 
generally lonely child, being introduced to the Police by my wonderful 
17-year-old sister, Catherine. We used to go for long dreamy walks in the 
countryside singing So Lonely and Can't Stand Losing You. We used to walk past 
three donkeys and even named them after the band members: Sting, Andy and Stu. 

We'd laugh about the lyrics in Message in a Bottle – we thought it was "broke 
my nose" instead of "wrote my note". My big sister inspired me with confidence 
and self-belief so that I felt I was actually an OK person, and my self-esteem 
got higher whenever I was with her. When she went off to train as a nurse in 
London I was bereft, but the wonderful sounds of Sting, Andy and Stu as the 
Police kept my spirits up until it was my turn to leave home too. 

Even now, as a mother of four, I get nostalgic chills as I listen to Bring on 
the Night, as memories of my sister and the Police are so intertwined.

Barbara Daniels

We love to eat: Snake sandwiches

Ingredients

1 packet snake (stuffed pork roll)

1 packet breadcakes

In 1970, aged 14, I first encountered a problem that besets adult life – a 
shortage of cash. Records, football matches, clothes, Player's No 6 and even 
going out with girls all competed strongly for a limited supply of ready money. 
Luckily, a solution presented itself. The transition of our school from grammar 
to comprehensive had been far from problem-free, and meant that teachers had to 
be redeployed from simple school-dinner supervision to a law-enforcement role 
outside. I realised that if I skipped school dinners nobody would notice or, 
for that matter, care. I could pocket the cash and triple my disposable income. 
The downside of course was the midday hunger pangs – but I found that they 
could be avoided if I trained myself to wait until I had a double-tea.

Double tea consisted each day of six snake sandwiches. "Snake" had been named 
so by a favourite uncle – chopped ham and pork roll, each slice with a central 
disc of stuffing where the backbone had been removed. The recipe was simple – 
take one packet of six white breadcakes, cut each in half and insert two slices 
of snake. Variation – add a blob of HP sauce. Not the healthiest of meals, 
maybe, but strangely satisfying and this was, after all, the start of the 70s.

I survived on this diet on most days for the next four years until I left 
school. My mum was surprised at how much I could eat without putting on weight, 
but put it down to burgeoning adulthood.

As a strategy it worked very well. I instantly had a sizeable income stream to 
fund all the things above and more – eventually financing occasional days off 
school with trips to Leeds and Sheffield. Instead of physics, chemistry and 
biology A-levels, I saw some of the great films of the 70s – The French 
Connection, The Godfather and A Clockwork Orange – awakening a life-long 
interest in cinema. And my mum never did find out how I could eat so much 
without putting on weight.Neil Pepper

We'd love to hear your stories


We will pay £25 for every Letter to, Playlist, Snapshot or We love to eat we 
publish. Write toFamily <http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> Life, 
The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email 
family@theguardian.com. Please include your address and phone number
