
I was watching a documentary the other night about an airline disaster. I’ve 
been watching a lot of films like that recently. In this instance, a plane 
suffered a catastrophic loss of flight controls about an hour after takeoff. 
The pilots did all they could to steer the aircraft using only the throttle but 
had very limited control.

The plane went into what is known as a fugoid, which means that it goes into a 
sequence of pitches up and down. Unless control of the aircraft’s rudder is 
regained, it will gradually lose altitude at which point either a landing must 
be attempted or – as was the case in this particular flight – the plane will 
crash.

In the seven months since you died, my life has gone into something of a 
fugoid. There is no real control. At its best it feels like a mere procession 
of days with all the colour washed out. At its worst, it’s a living nightmare 
in which I feel like I’m going a little bit mad without you and the knowledge 
that you’re never coming back is almost too much to cope with.

Not long before you died, you asked what I thought would be the hardest thing. 
I replied: “Getting out of bed in the morning.” I was wrong. The getting out of 
bed is not a struggle and, indeed, our youngest daughter makes sure of that! My 
duty of care for both our girls provides the impetus to get up and start the 
day.

No, the real difficulty is going to bed at night. I should have known that 
really, given that we did absolutely everything together for 11 years, 
including going to bed at the same time. We never did that thing of saying: 
“You go – I’ll be up in a bit.” Going to bed was part of our completely shared 
life. Now I go to bed alone and I’ll do anything to put it off.

The fugoid rules my days. There are phases where I’ll try to be positive and 
look after myself. I joined a gym a few months ago and started to go quite 
regularly. I was drinking juice daily and eating well. Then I would ask myself 
what/who was I doing that for, and slip into a period of self-indulgence, 
eating rubbish, drinking too much and staying up late watching airline disaster 
documentaries. You would be horrified by what I’m watching. Sorry.

There are days when I feel you very close to me still and I can almost hear 
you commenting on things (in your inimitable way).

Other days, I think that’s all nonsense and you are just dead and gone and 
that your absence is total and final. Even writing this letter to you feels 
strange. Can you see it?

I try not to let it affect our girls. They are doing remarkably well, all 
things considered. Our eldest is entering a hugely exciting period in her life 
and on the verge of getting herself “a fella”, as you would say. She is 
grabbing life with both hands and her course – for the moment – is as steady as 
any 16-year-old’s would be.

Our youngest needs very careful attention. I don’t know what it must be like 
for her at eight to suddenly find herself without you. You cared so deeply and 
so well for her I was always humbled by your instinct and wisdom. You were an 
extraordinary mother and I can’t imagine what a loss that is at her age.

Seven months on, the cliche about people getting on with their own lives is 
true and I do find people actively avoiding me sometimes. They have their own 
burdens to carry and the last thing some people want is for me to constantly 
tramp my big griefy footprints through their lives. What’s not cliched are the 
many acts of kindness and the help we have received from our friends over the 
past few months. Some of them would have really surprised you and are a 
testament to how loved you were.

I had 11 years of deep, deep love and companionship, the kind of which I know 
only comes along once in a lifetime

Now, if the fugoid analogy holds, then I must either wrest control of my life 
back or risk ploughing into a metaphorical mountain. I don’t want to sound 
melodramatic but my life really is empty now without you. It was fairly aimless 
before you came into it. I had 11 years of deep, deep love and companionship, 
the kind Iknow comes along only once in a lifetime, if that.

So, what now? I’m 43. The girls are keeping me busy and my love for them knows 
no bounds. But they will grow up and, hopefully, find loving companions of 
their own.

Where have you gone? Why did you go so soon? What will I do? I miss you. I 
love you.

Your husband
