
Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson has accused Nicola Sturgeon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> of “keeping Scotland on a 
knife-edge” until the SNP leader believes she can win a second independence 
referendum.

Constitutional questions dominated the second televised leaders’ debate of the 
Holyrood election campaign which took place on Tuesday evening, despite the 
fact that the SNP are not expected to commit to another referendum within the 
next parliamentary term in their manifesto.

During a series of angry exchanges, Davidson also baited Scottish Labour leader
Kezia Dugdale <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/kezia-dugdale> over the 
strength of her pro-union leadership should another referendum be called, 
causing Dugdale to retort sharply: “I don’t need to sit on a tank and wave a 
union jack to show I think the United Kingdom is a good thing.” Dugdale was 
referring to an infamous photocall by the Conservative leader during the 
referendum campaign of 2014.

The subject of taxation was also high on the agenda during the STV debate at 
the Assembly Rooms in Edinburgh, where the leaders of the five main parties 
cross-examined one another in turn, as well as answering questions from the 
audience.

Dugdale presented Sturgeon with figures showing that someone earning £250,000 
would not pay a penny more in tax under the Scottish government’s recent 
proposals.


Last week the first minister resisted heavy pressure from Labour and the Lib 
Dems to raise taxes in the next parliament, dropping a proposed 50p additional 
rate for the highest earners which she had promised before last year’s general 
election and opting instead not to pass on George Osborne’s effective tax cut 
for those paying the 40p rate.

The Scottish Labour leader, who has committed to raising the top rate of 
income tax to 50p, said that the SNP leader “won’t ask rich people to pay a 
penny more”, while Scottish Liberal Democrat leader Willie Rennie accused 
Sturgeon of “letting people down with her timidity”.


Patrick Harvie, who unveiled the Scottish Green proposals for a 60p top rate 
of income tax for the wealthiest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/29/scottish-green-party-60-per-cent-tax-high-earners>
 earlier on Tuesday, accused the SNP of following a “status quo tax policy” at 
a time when they had every opportunity to act boldly. The Scottish parliament 
gains full control of income tax rates and bands from April 2017.

At the first TV debate, hosted by the BBC last Thursday, Sturgeon appeared to 
refine her tax policy on the hoof when she said she could yet introduce a 50p 
rate inScotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> within two years but 
only if tax avoidance could be tackled.

On Tuesday evening she insisted that the SNP was putting forward “fair, 
reasonable and progressive tax proposals that will raise money for our public 
services”.

It was Sturgeon herself who introduced the first reference to the constitution 
when she asked during her cross-examination of Dugdale: “Do you understand why 
people in Scotland are so angry with Labour? Do you regret your alliance with 
the Tories and will you take this opportunity to apologise for it?” Dugdale 
responded that she did not regret voting no and that she would do it again.

Davidson drew some of the heartiest applause from the studio audience when she 
asked Sturgeon whether in announcing anew drive to push for independence 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/12/nicola-sturgeon-snp-to-resume-drive-for-scottish-independence>
 – as the SNP leader recently announced she would do this summer – amounted to 
respecting the result of the 2014 referendum.


Sturgeon responded: “I am absolutely respecting the result of the referendum … 
because I am admitting that I didn’t achieve a majority … That’s what I want to 
do in the months and years to come.”

Insisting, as she has done since September 2014, that the people of Scotland 
will decide the timing of the next referendum, the SNP leader said that “the 
future of this country is in the hands of the people” before asking Davidson: 
“Why do you fear public opinion?”

Asked by an audience member what she thought would be the result of another 
referendum, Sturgeon said: “I think the next time we will vote yes, but it is 
up to the people of Scotland. I accept that I have to get the arguments better 
this time.”


But Dugdale countered that the economic case for independence “has fallen 
apart”, adding: “I actually believed you Nicola when you said this was once in 
a lifetime opportunity. People who voted yes and no want to move on and want us 
to use the powers we have in our own parliament.”

