
My daughter moved from Vancouver to Britain some years ago to go to 
university; eventually marrying another student. She found stable employment 
and recently gave birth to her first child. I love her very much, and the 
geographic distance has been difficult for me to bear, although we talk and 
email, and I visit regularly, spending time, energy and thousands of dollars 
per trip to maintain our relationship and be supportive of her pregnancy and 
labour. The underlying problem is that my daughter suffers from anxiety, and 
when she is panicked, and especially during pregnancy and after, she can be 
very hard on herself and those closest to her.

Her mood swings exhaust me. I realise I am dealing with postnatal depression, 
and am relieved that she has the benefit of a good therapist, a devoted man, 
friends and support groups. If it weren’t for my grandchild, I’d consider 
taking a break for a year, and just phoning or emailing. This would be hard on 
me, and probably on my daughter as well, but I’m tired of holding my tongue in 
order to keep our limited time together peaceful. (She had an outright meltdown 
recently, shrieking at me when I made a gentle suggestion about how she might 
get more rest.)

My daughter is a person of considerable character and intelligence. She’s also 
a perfectionist who says that she wants stability and routine, and then makes 
decisions that keep her life complicated; a kind-hearted soul who alternates 
between humorous charm and lashing out at those who love her the most. I’d like 
to find a middle road between tiptoeing around her and being snapped at. I’d 
greatly appreciate your perspective.

It’s brilliant that you have invited a different perspective because when an 
exchange between two people keeps snagging on the same bushes, one really needs 
to look at taking a different route. There was a tightness about your letter. I 
could almost feel you thinking about every word you typed. I wonder what it is 
you are trying to hold so firmly on to?

It must be hard for you to see your daughter exploding at seemingly small, 
helpful suggestions you make, but I wonder if you might see that to her, they 
have long, long roots that lead to somewhere else. Perhaps your suggestions are 
seen as criticism.

The psychotherapist Naomi Stadlen <http://naomistadlen.com/>, who has written 
much about mother/child relationships, calls these roots “the small print”.

You may think you are not being critical but I would suggest gently that your 
actions speak louder than your words

“New mothers,” explains Stadlen, “yearn for the loving kindness of their own 
mothers, even if it was in short supply when they were younger. What they don’t 
need, as new mothers themselves, are critical mothers. So [with] the little 
things, like gently suggesting she gets more rest, your daughter may hear 
criticism in the small print.”

The criticism being that she is not getting enough rest, as if she is a small, 
over-tired child, instead of seeing her as a responsible mother doing her 
utmost for her child. You see the difference in emphasis?

You may, at this point, think you are not being critical but I would suggest 
gently that your actions speak louder than your words. Your letter is full of 
the things you’ve done to keep your relationship with your daughter going – the 
air-miles, the emotional and financial cost. Yet there she is anxious, 
critical, depressed, non-compliant. Do you think you might be able to step back 
and look at this differently?

Stadlen thinks that your daughter’s mood swings were “probably the result of 
her struggling to be polite: you’ve spent so much money and energy travelling 
all that way to visit her – and then you say something annoying and she can’t 
hold her temper in any longer. The clue is in the ‘meltdown’ which you relate 
in brackets as ‘(shrieking at me when I made a gentle suggestion about how she 
might get more rest)’. Your daughter doesn’t need unasked-for suggestions, not 
even gentle ones. ‘Suggestions’ usually mask a criticism of how a new mother is 
managing. If she asks you for a suggestion, that’s a different matter.”

Your daughter seems to have a lot going for her, what about you? What is your 
life like without her? What was her childhood like? What was yours like? What 
is stopping you from being able to relax into enjoying your relationship with 
your daughter and her child? What are you afraid of?

You say your daughter suffers from anxiety and she may well do; you say she 
has postnatal depression but is that a diagnosis or a guess? Either way, do you 
think you could support her without judgment? Have you asked her what sort of 
help she wants from you?

Stadlen asks: “Could you also be suffering from anxiety about your daughter 
and so exacerbate the problem? What your daughter needs is your trust and 
confidence in her. If you think about how well your daughter has done, there is 
plenty to feel trusting and confident about – if not downright proud of her. If 
you can’t trust your daughter, she will feel tense and have times of snapping. 
If you can think about her and feel less anxious, she can [also] relax.”

It’s clear how much you love your daughter, but I think perhaps you need to 
show your love with a lighter, almost invisible, touch. Love without criticism 
is still very much love.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
