
Choosing the right pricing strategy can make or break your business. Pitch 
your price right and you’ve got a decent profit margin, but get it wrong and 
your brand could suffer irreparable damage. So what pitfalls should you avoid 
when building a pricing strategy?


The most important aspect of working out your price is deciding whether you’re 
a cheap commodity business or a premium enterprise, says Carl Reader, author of
The Startup Coach <http://www.carlreader.com/>. Without clarity on your market 
your pricing will be wrong from the start.


“Avoid getting caught in the middle at all costs – no one wants to be too 
cheap to be considered a prestige product but too expensive to appeal to those 
saving every penny,” he says. Next, look at the market rate for your offering 
and make sure you can make a profit.

Pricing low is a temptation for many small businesses but it’s rarely a good 
move according to Stephen Nightingale, founder of online jewellery firm
nightingaleonline.com <http://nightingaleonline.com/>. “Don’t try to ‘buy’ 
sales by pricing too low at the expense of your profit margin,” he says. 
“Breaking even won’t make a contribution to business growth and if you price 
too low, your profit’s gone.”


Pricing low is a temptation for many small businesses but it’s rarely a good 
move

Slashing prices is a tactic often employed by small businesses trying to get 
pricing right and though it can increase sales and help cashflow in the 
short-term,marketing consultant <http://www.success-matters.com/> Claire Boyles 
cautions against falling into the pattern of offering discounts. “Your 
customers will soon work out that to get a bargain all they have to do is wait 
for you to reduce the price, and then you’ll have much lower sales in terms of 
cash actually going into your business.”


But there are exceptions to that rule, and introductory pricing can open doors 
for small businesses trying to get established. Lindsey Bauer launchedOtti Prams
 <http://www.ottiprams.net/> with her husband Angus in October 2015. They 
design limited-edition travel system pushchairs stocked by House of Fraser and 
independents.

Bauer says the firm’s original price of £375 (including VAT) per pram proved 
cost prohibitive for a new business entering such a strong, competitive market 
so they set a special introductory price of £225 (including VAT) per pram. They 
have been running the introductory offer since last Christmas.

“Our sales and profile have since surged, creating the sustainability to allow 
future price increases such as when we extend the range this summer,” says 
Bauer. The couple will increase their prices for their new models in the next 
couple of months.

Understanding the pricing strategy of your competitors is also vital. 
“Customers will compare your prices with the competition – if your price is 
lower, they’ll ask what they’re missing out on and if it’s higher, they’ll ask 
whether you are taking advantage or genuinely providing a better product,” says 
Tom Meehan, founder of hotel management software firmMinibarra 
<http://www.minibarra.com/>. “For your customers to chose you over the 
competition, you have to answer those questions better than they do.”


Competing on price isn’t always the right approach for a small business, 
however. “Bigger companies have got price nailed – they can deliver quality 
products quicker and cheaper because they benefit from economies of scale so 
the greater the volume they process, the lower the cost per unit is,” says 
Boyles.

As a small business you’re more likely to be successful if you differentiate 
based on unique features and benefits or scarcity rather than competing on 
price, Boyles says. “Think of the value of diamonds, attributed to their rarity 
(or the control of the number of diamonds on the market). The higher the 
demand, the higher the price people are willing to pay – if what you’re selling 
is rare, special or unique.”

That strategy works for textile artist Cath Janes, founder of online 
accessories boutiqueKraken Kreations <http://www.krakenkreations.co.uk/>. She 
advises against comparing your price with competitors, especially those who 
“charge knock-down prices and are ready to undercut for a tiny profit margin” 
because it can undermine your own sense of worth.

“Instead, I show my customers the various stages of my products from scribbles 
on paper through to fabric choices, pattern cutting, stitching and packing,” 
she says. “It helps them understand why I charge the way I do, and appreciate 
that I’ll never be cheaper than Amazon but will always produce products that 
are worth the money.”

Undercutting your competition is also inadvisable, according to Dawn Baird of 
communication consultancySensei <http://www.sensei.ie/>. Instead of attracting 
customers, it can put them off. “Charging less than the going rate can create a 
perception that you’re less experienced or don’t believe in the quality of your 
own work, so why should the client?”

In a competitive market where consumers have everything they need, an 
effective pricing strategy needs to be based on the value your product brings 
to the customer rather than market trends or what the competition charges, says 
brand specialist Kubi Springer ofShe Builds Brands 
<http://www.shebuildsbrands.com/>.

“A value-based pricing strategy entails communicating how your product will 
improve your customer’s life so, for example, a technology brand might explain 
how the product will save the customer time or make their lives easier rather 
than focusing on how it works,” she says.

This is also true for businesses that sell services to other businesses. 
Mukarram Bhaiji, a pricing strategy specialist at KPMG, advises firms to 
consider the benefits they are providing for clients, for example, helping them 
to sell more or reduce their costs. Once you are clear where you are bringing 
value, how much value you are delivering, and how that compares with your 
competitors, it is easier to price your services appropriately.

“As a small business owner you need to understand the sources of value your 
service brings to your customers,” says Bhaiji. “Unless you understand that you 
will mis-price your service.”

What about when the price is wrong? Meehan says it’s always easier to reduce 
your price but it is sometimes possible to increase it. He recommends three 
steps: “Ensure sure your customers are satisfied with your current product 
before you increase the price; add extras and improvements to justify it; and 
prepare for a backlash.”

Dropping or increasing your price isn’t the only route to recovery when you 
get it wrong. “Consider cross-sales (think the grocer who sells cream when 
strawberry sales are poor), down-sales (selling a cheaper product now on the 
basis that your customer might return for a more expensive one later) and 
up-sales (adding a more expensive element to a baseline package),” advises 
Springer. “Creating a strategic partnership with another brand that enables you 
to cross-sell products can also be a wise move.”

The right pricing strategy takes into account the actual costs of running your 
business and prioritises profit margin, but it also safeguards the future, says 
Richard Taylor, founder of software development firmISArc 
<http://www.isarc.co.uk/>. “Your profit margin is what keeps you afloat and 
pricing well allows you to forward plan, whether that’s replacing expensive 
equipment three years from now or helping you prepare for the unforeseen events 
that can otherwise set a small business back.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.

