
If I used to have an hour to myself, I don't remember what I did with it. Did 
I cherish those 60 minutes as much as I do now? Baby Flora is moving more but 
sleeping less, and when she does drop off at the weekend I'm not sure what to 
do. I could drop off too, do some work or watch a DVD with Lydia, who's nine. I 
mean to do the latter but after 15 minutes we still can't agree on a film. Then 
Flora starts grumbling and I have to pat her on the back to get her back to 
sleep.

My mother, who has always helped enormously with my children but is getting 
frailer and harder of hearing, sticks her head round the door just as Flora 
finally drops off. "Is Flora asleep?" she shouts.

"Not any more," I reply.

"Pardon?" she says

"Where's your hearing aid?" I ask.

"There's nothing wrong with my hearing," she says crossly.

When people I haven't seen for a while ask how it's going, after nearly a 
year, I tell them its hard work. That it can be backbreaking to follow a 
toddler, however chubby and gorgeous, round and round the room. But Flora is 
not the only one on a treadmill. Sometimes life in our house seems reduced to a 
series of repetitive tasks. There's getting everyone up, dressed, breakfasted, 
pack-lunched, out of the house, back into the house, homeworked, any after 
school activity, fed again, washed etc. Not to mention the shopping, washing 
up, cleaning and laundry.

In light of which, the reluctance of my eldest, Sam, to join in seems, at 
times, a sane option. However, his refusal has led to him volunteering (before 
he is pushed) to stay with a friend for a while. After just one day the phone 
rings; it is Sam, full of enthusiasm. "I've got two job interviews, tomorrow 
and the day after."

Great, I say, because it really is great. Don't ask anything else, I tell 
myself but I can't help it. "What are they for?"

"They are telesales jobs," he says.

"But do you want that sort of job?" It's fair to ask, since the last time he 
did one it lasted two weeks.

"Yes," he says, "I will let you know how I get on."

And so he does. "Listen, before you get cross, it wasn't my fault," he shouts 
down the phone. "It really wasn't my fault and J can tell you. I set the alarm 
and it didn't go off. I woke up and it was 11 o'clock."

"What time was the interview?" I ask, but I think I know.

"Eleven o'clock. But it wasn't my fault. I can't understand."

I interrupt because I know this could go on for some time. "I'm not cross, 
Sam, it's your life. It's just a shame."

"I got to the first interview and the bloke, he really wanted to give me the 
job but it was door-to-door selling and I don't want dogs attacking me … I 
really didn't want the job. "

"Maybe go for a job you actually want," I say calmly.

So I decide to wait some more before clearing Sam's room although it looks, as 
it has for years, like a frenzied burglar has trashed it. Meanwhile, his 
immediate legacy is not confined to his untidy bedroom. Lydia comes into the 
sitting room, crying somewhat theatrically. "I wasn't doing my homework and Dad 
told me off," she says. "And then Tilly said I was just like Sam and," Lydia 
gulps, "that's a horrible thing to say because Sam's nice. All that's wrong 
with him is, he won't get a job."

"Yes, it isn't very kind," I say, feeling rather ashamed.

"But I'm afraid she probably heard it here first."
