
The Daily Express owner Richard Desmond 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> is to build a secondary 
school as part of a 1m sq ft redevelopment of his old Westferry printworks site 
in London’s upmarket Docklands area.

The school, which could become an academy, will sit among a mixed commercial 
and residential development comprising nine towers of up to 30 floors, 
containing 722 homes, retail and office space, cafes, restaurants and public 
open spaces.

Boris Johnson approved the development in one of his last acts as London 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayor, after seizing control of planning 
authority from Tower Hamlets council. Building the school is a condition of the 
planning permission.

There is a chance the new school could be become an academy. If it does, 
according tothe Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/business/docklands-development-gives-desmond-his-latest-licence-to-print-money-n537j6vcw>
, it is understood that the media billionaire, who once owned niche interest 
adult magazines, wants to call it the Richard Desmond academy.

Market experts have said that Desmond stands to make a fortune off the 
development, which could be worth as much as £750m when it is completed. He 
already owns the freehold on the site – for which he is estimated to have spent 
about £30m – and construction costs are expected to be between £250m and £300m.

Related: Richard Desmond's firm in £25m loss after price cuts and digital 
investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/29/richard-desmonds-firm-in-25m-loss-after-price-war-and-digital-investment>

Johnson seized control of planning authority for the site in February and was 
granted permission in April. It was initially rejected by Tower Hamlets for 
failing to include enough affordable housing and would not achieve a mixed and 
balanced community. Just 11% of the housing proposed, which is close to the 
Canary Wharf financial district, is classed as affordable.

The mayor told the council that he was calling in the application because it 
had “fallen short of its housing delivery target” and “the council has 
identified an established need for additional secondary school places in the 
borough”. Despite that, Tower Hamlets has maintained its opposition to the 
scheme, publishing a report in early April, before permission was granted, 
saying it had resolved to reject the application if it could.

According to promotional literature, over 1 hectare of the site has been 
provided for a new secondary school of two to four storeys, providing 1,200 
pupil places. It obliquely addresses the rumour that Desmond would want to run 
the school as an academy. “Any decisions regarding the proposed operators of 
the school will be for the London borough of Tower Hamlets and the Department 
of Education to resolve, and are beyond the remit of a planning application,” 
it says.

Among the development’s most determined opponents have been local sailing 
enthusiasts, who say the new highrises will ruin wind conditions around their 
club, which is adjacent to the development site.

Benjamin Davis, water operations manager the Docklands Sailing and Watersports 
Centre, said: “It’s going to reduce the wind that we receive, and it’s going to 
distort is as well. We are supportive of development happening there, but this 
is the end of a two-year planning process that they have gone through, and 
throughout that they haven’t considered any alternatives.”

DP9, Desmond’s planning adviser, which originally asked Johnson to take 
control of the planning process, has negotiated a mitigation package of 
£546,000 for the club. But Davis said he was still disappointed with the 
outcome. “They need to fund a mitigation package, without regard for the fact 
that you can’t buy wind,” Davis said. “So we have got to adapt our operation. 
It’s really difficult for us.”

Davis’s biggest fear was that the change in wind conditions would put 
customers off coming to the club, which operates as a charity and provides 
subsidised sailing courses for disadvantaged young people. “We are not funded 
by anyone,” he said. “We have to find our own funds and if people don’t come 
down for sailing we don’t make any money through that, which means we can’t 
provide the youth activities we do in the summer. It’s disappointing but there 
doesn’t seem to be anything we can do.”
