
‘Last summer there was a moment when there were concerns that media studies 
might be deleted,” says David Buckingham, an expert on children and technology 
and professor at Loughborough University, who spent much of last year fighting 
for the subject’s future in English schools.

The moment passed: new specifications for media and film studies 
qualifications werepublished last week 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications?departments[]=department-for-education**>
. But will the updated content, combined with our media-saturated lives, swing 
more support behind media education for 14 to 18-year-olds, and reverse a 
decline that has seen numbers taking media GCSE fall from a high of almost 
70,000 in 2008 to 50,000 in 2014, while the number of students training to be 
media teachers on the only specialist PGCE is just 13?

Making qualifications harder has been the government’s goal under a process 
that has seen A-levels scrapped in anthropology and performing arts, along with
GCSEs in law and catering 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/26/media-studies-survives-but-leisure-studies-doesnt-in-final-cull-of-a-levels>
. But media studies – the 10th most popular A-level with around 22,000 entries 
in 2014 – is the biggest subject to have come under threat.

Related: Cameron wants diversity in universities? Sort out the school syllabus 
first 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/08/cameron-wants-diversity-in-universities-sort-out-the-school-syllabus-first>

Changes from 2017 include a reduction in coursework and much greater emphasis 
on theory, along with the removal of film from media courses to avoid overlap. 
While Buckingham says the government has dealt with some concerns raised during 
aconsultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/ofqual-launches-further-consultation-on-reformed-qualifcations-for-2017>
, he believes the new AS and A-level media will include some theorists (Judith 
Butler, Baudrillard) who are “incredibly difficult”.

Chailey school, near Lewes in East Sussex, is a high-achieving rural 
comprehensive. Its current year 11s will be the school’s last GCSE media group. 
In the lesson I visited, students were doing audience research for a unit on 
advertising, going round the classroom with questionnaires about products they 
had designed: tennis accessories; a fizzy smoothie; a microwaveable “hottie” 
hat.

The new A-level includes theorists (Judith Butler, Baudrillard) who are 
‘incredibly difficult’

They are sorry about their school’s decision. Katy, 15, a keen artist who 
chose media mainly for its design elements, said: “I think it’s a shame, and 
the opposite of what you’d think would happen, as there are more and more jobs 
in this area.”

Ashley, 15, will take a media A-level with computer science and software 
development at a local college – proving the point made by the subject’s 
supporters that while its teachers are often attached to English departments, 
the students are a mixed bunch.

The Chailey class teacher, Ian Smith, believes the subject needed updating – 
students here study CD and DVD design but not social networks – but says: “It’s 
bizarre to lose it when so much of our lives is taken up with media”. 
Headteacher Lesley Young says the decision to axe the course was made for 
financial reasons. Her school is small and uncertainty surrounding media 
studies’ future was a factor.

Other institutions remain committed, with around 1,300 offering A-level media. 
While some academy chains offer a more traditional range of subjects, some 
grammar schools, including Latymer in London and Mayfield in Kent, are among 
those with media teachers.

Nicola Naisbett, course leader at Queen Elizabeth sixth-form college in 
Darlington, says her college hasn’t seen a dip in student numbers. “Media and 
film are popular because of the skills students develop, and the reason they’re 
so engaged is that they’re learning about things affecting them now.”

Anecdotally, some teachers and examiners will attest to disappointing 
standards: even if there is no reason why more able students should not apply 
their critical skills to soap operas or newspapers, they suggest the subject’s 
accessibility, combined with the idea that universities would prefer something 
else, could mean higher-ability students are put off.

Related: Six questions to ask before choosing your A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/03/how-to-decide-which-a-levels-to-take>

But Buckingham says complaints about “soft subjects” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jan/22/deceive-children-worthless-qualifications>
 can mask conservative attitudes to learning: “English was seen to be a 
dangerously newfangled subject in the 1930s, by those who believed real 
education was classics.” Underlying the study of media, he points out, is a 
democratising impulse: “Undeniably in the 1960s and 1970s, media studies was 
part of a broader set of shifts – the raising of the school leaving age, the 
idea that the curriculum needed to be more responsive to the needs of 
working-class students. In English, for example, there was the idea that you 
could study TV plays – so lessons would be more reflective of the lives of the 
majority of students and not just the cultural tastes of an elite.”

Andrew Crisell, emeritus professor at Sunderland University who taught on one 
of the first communications degrees, points out that the initiative for media 
courses came from polytechnics and later the new university sector. “The polys 
had to position themselves as distinct from traditional unis and one way of 
doing this was to find gaps in the market and also degrees that might provide 
routes into the world of work.” He believes the key to media studies’ image 
problem lies in the association with leisure: “Traditionally media have been 
associated with recreation, and there is a general assumption that watching 
films or television involves less intellectual effort than reading a book.”

Others point to the issue of specialisation, which still happens much earlier 
in England and Wales than elsewhere. Should teenagers of 14 be identifying 
possible career paths – or keeping their studies broad?

The first film studies O-level exam was in 1973, meaning those who took it are 
now almost 60. The subject and its younger cousin, media studies, have survived 
– for now. Though he remains concerned about the detail, Buckingham believes 
the changes, coupled with the government’s assertions about “restoring rigour”, 
should at least put the “nail in the coffin” of the argument that media is a 
soft option. “It’s never been valid but looking at these documents nothing 
could be further from the truth”.

In Darlington, Naisbett insists the new curriculum will not stop her students 
having fun – especially in lessons where they head outdoors with cameras, or 
design products on computers. “People mistake their enthusiasm and excitement 
for finding it easy,” she says. “Just because somebody loves playing football 
doesn’t mean it isn’t hard.”
