
It has been coming for a while. The Sun, despite its support for the monarchy, 
has given both barrels toPrince William 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-william>.

In a spread headlined “Meddling Wills is throne idle”, the paper accused him 
of a reluctance to carry out public engagements while enjoying the life of a 
huntin’, shootin’ and fishin’ “gentleman country farmer”.

There is, said the article, “little doubt about William’s desperation to shun 
the role he was born to do”. He is “the very essence of a reluctant royal.”

The piece was prompted by one of the prince’s rare public appearances - his 
first in 2016 - in which he addressed foreign office staff and, in so doing,
provoked something of a row. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/16/prince-william-appears-to-signal-support-for-remaining-in-eu>

His remarks prompted speculation that he was endorsing the UK’s continued 
membership of the European Union (a view comprehensively rubbished by the 
Guardian’s Michael White 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2016/feb/17/prince-william-speaks-out-against-brexit-rubbish>
).

But the Sun saw it as a breach of royal protocol, implying that it was an 
anti-Brexit speech. Whether it was or wasn’t, the paper’s senior executives 
believed the prince should have been more careful in what he said.

More than that, the Sun used the opportunity to air other grievances about the 
prince. It reported: “Many people, including his own friends, are starting to 
question whether William really wants to be royal at all.”

It contrasted the number of public engagements he carried out in 2015 with 
other members of the royal family. With a total of 122, William did fewer than 
11 other royals, including his 94-year-old grandfather. The Sun’s story stated:

“He deliberately based himself, wife Kate and their children — George, two, 
and nine-month-old Charlotte — out of the public eye at the ten-bedroom Anmer 
Hall in deepest Norfolk.

And he shows little interest in taking on more royal patronages, preferring 
instead to work as a pilot for the local air ambulance.”

It criticised his failure, as Bafta president, to turn up the awards ceremony 
“for the second successive year”. And it also pointed out that he rarely spends 
any time in London “despite YOU having to fork out £4m for the refurbishment of 
the family’s 22-room apartment at Kensington Palace.”

The Sun’s real message, about the prince’s dislike for the media, is also 
revealed mid-way through the article:

“His disdain for the media is well known and the only images of his two 
children — and increasingly his wife — are carefully controlled by the Palace 
spin machine.”

This view, that Prince William is seeking to exercise control over 
journalists, particularly photographers, is not confined to the Sun. Several 
editors have remarked on the way in which his staff unleash a barrage of 
complaints whenever pictures are taken of the prince’s wife, the Duchess of 
Cambridge.

It is conceded that his children should be protected, but palace claims that 
they are being stalked by photographers have yet to be proved.

No legal action has been taken against the alleged stalkers, a fact which 
convinces some editors that the complaints have more to do with sealing off the 
couple from any scrutiny whatsoever.

Tabloid editors are not the only ones to question the prince’s reluctance to 
appear in public. Joan Smith,writing in the Independent in 2013 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/special-perks-for-duke-of-cambridge-who-but-prince-william-gets-a-year-s-paternity-leave-8816796.html>
, noted how few engagements he carried out.

More recently, in August last year 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/prince-george-and-the-paparazzi-deferring-to-the-long-arm-of-buckingham-palace-10457349.html>
, she picked up on the implications ofan open letter to the media  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/14/palace-increasingly-dangerous-paparazzi-tactics-prince-george-duke-duchess-cambridge>
written by the prince’s communications secretary, Jason Knauf, in which he 
complained about paparazzi hiding in car boots and using children as “bait” in 
order to take pictures of Prince George.

“People are allowed to take pictures in a public place as long as their 
behaviour doesn’t amount to stalking,” she wrote. And if it did amount to 
stalking then a prosecution was possible under the Protection from Harassment 
Act.


Although the editors of the Sun and Daily Mail, Tony Gallagher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-gallagher> and Paul Dacre respectively, 
would normally have little truck with Smith, a former executive editor of 
Hacked Off, I imagine them agreeing with her further point.

What’s so wrong about “unauthorised” pictures of the royal children? Smith 
wrote:

“What no one bothered to ask after the publication of Knauf’s letter is what 
harm the Duke and Duchess have actually suffered. They are annoyed, but that’s 
different from being frightened, alarmed or distressed.”

I may be reading too much into the Sun’s broadside against Prince William, but 
I detect a change of heart that could turn into a change of strategy. Is it to 
be open season on the huntin’, shootin and fishin’ prince and his family from 
now on?
