
Your favourite episodes of Friends could soon come with added product 
placement following the rollout of new technology that digitally inserts 
branded goods into pre-existing video programmes.

The technology, described as “product placement on steroids” is being 
premiered for Bushmills whiskey in specially created content on Vice’s Viceland 
TV channel, but it could also be used to introduce product placements into 
older shows.

The technology is the result of a partnership between Mirriad Advertising 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Ltd and media agency Havas Media 
Group, which claims it will attract $25m (£17m) in spending over the next 12 
months.

Related: Triumph revival fuelled by continuing nostalgia for 1960s retro chic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/12/triumph-revival-fuelled-nostalgia-1960s-retro-chic>

“Forget intrusion, this is about creating content that becomes something of 
genuine interest so it’s led by content, not the product,” says Shane Ankeney, 
president of Arena Media US, part of Havas. “It’s a kind of product placement 
but on steroids.”


Using the new technology, brands can be swapped out to suit different 
audiences on different platforms, both on and off-line, a plus as Viceland 
rolls out into different territories.

It will also help combat ad blocking, say the companies behind it, because the 
placement is integrated into the video people are watching.

“What’s great is to pioneer what could become a new way of scaling product 
placements within content,” said Dominique Delport, global managing director of 
Havas Media Group. “And you get back some ad dollars that could have been lost 
to ad blocking techniques.”

“The potential going forward is to use this for other, perhaps older 
programmes as well, for instance episodes of Friends where ad products can be 
inserted pixel by pixel into the content beautifully creating new possibilities 
for brands.”

The choice of Vice as a rollout partner reflects the company’s willingness to 
experiment with different forms of advertising, and it has been especially 
successful with sponsored content. . Chief executive, Shane Smith, has said 
that digital advertising is faced with a “blood bath” if it doesn’t become more 
relevant to viewers.
