
After four years of training to become an occupational therapist (OT), it came 
as a complete shock to be awarded a bachelor of science. For what is 
essentially a caring profession, which many practitioners see as a career in 
applied common sense, to be considered a scientist is a strange thing.


Laboratories don’t usually feature in OT training, except for those of us old 
enough to have been subjected to cadaver studies. Drugs aren’t administered or 
tested. Test tubes, beakers and Bunsen burners belong to the strange beings 
inhabiting the chemistry block. For that reason, perhaps, the practice of 
occupational therapy can be unfairly labelled a pseudo-science, as our goal is 
to improve people’s lives through activity. We don’t administer cures via a 
syringe where an improvement is instantly observable in a patient’s biometrics, 
nor can we demonstrate our worth in improved joint range and muscle strength as 
our physiotherapy colleagues might do.

Related: Occupational therapy and mental health: ‘It’s not about basket 
weaving’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jan/28/occupational-therapy-mental-health-support>

But, despite this, the science within OT is worthy of the degree title with 
which it is associated. If an OT recommends a certain approach to a daily task, 
a particular amount or type of care, a configuration of equipment, they aren’t 
just making this stuff up. Their clinical decision is based on the outcome of 
empirically tested research. But in a profession where quality of life is our 
purpose for being, maintaining scientific rigour is no mean feat.

This has been made obvious to those of us involved an OT-led research project 
atThe Walton Centre <https://www.thewaltoncentre.nhs.uk/> investigating better 
ways of identifying patients with so-called hidden disabilities. Such patients 
are admitted to us with a life-threatening condition, are treated by our 
brilliant neurosurgeons and initially give the appearance of recovering 
unscathed, but go on to demonstrate crippling social, cognitive or behavioural 
difficulties as a result of the brain injury they have sustained. These 
injuries are not evident on a scan of any kind, and at first glance these 
patients are walking, talking and functioning just as they were before. As 
such, they’re sent home with nothing more than the promise of a clinic letter.

But the extent to which the wheels have come off becomes apparent at their 
six-week follow-up, where it transpires that their previous employment has now 
become an impossibility, their marriage is in tatters, and going to the shop 
for a pint of milk is a task of Herculean proportions. By this time, referral 
to agencies who may be able to help becomes exponentially more difficult, and a 
window for rehabilitation may be closing fast.

One of our research-focused OTs has developed a new assessment which may 
identify these subtle problems far more easily than current tools. Her research 
plan seems straightforward: take 100 patients who don’t seem to have any 
problems post-brain injury; use our new assessment with them; then test them 
with our long-standing, more complex assessments. If the results correlate, 
then… ta dah! We have a new, reliable tool we can use to help people.

But it’s not that simple.

In order to get the job done properly, our research OT has had to undertake a 
Master’s of Research to ensure the scientific method is rigorously followed. In 
addition to holding down a near-full-time clinical post, they have used every 
spare day off, weekend, bank holiday, chunks of annual leave and begged study 
leave. They have stated, then re-stated, then re-re-stated their project, 
methods and back-up plans. She is now looking down the barrel of one unpaid day 
in work per week to see the project through.

Unlike medicine, a clinical research culture is not built into our profession. 
You can be a clinician, or you can be a researcher. The option to have division 
of roles between the two, where you are adding to the profession’s body of 
patient-related evidence while still treading the shop floor exists only in a 
very few places. In contrast, for a consultant doctor, a 50-50 split between 
working with patients and carrying out research is pretty much a given.

Related: 'Punching above their weight’: the impact of occupational therapists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jan/27/impact-of-occupational-therapists>

An additional complication is that much of my colleague’s efforts seem to be 
around shoe-horning a human behaviour project into a paradigm which is far more 
suited to the analysis of blood samples and reactions to medications. Can the 
scientific process be adapted to the unique nature of our profession, and still 
remain a science? It can, but we are left with a chicken and egg scenario. 
Occupational therapists need to become more involved in research to highlight 
our scientific credentials, but without the scientific credentials to influence 
existing research frameworks, we can’t get easily involved in research.

Our professional publications and journals are always bemoaning the lack of 
clinical research going on, but in the absence of funding, the pursuit of 
science in care seems to ride upon the goodwill and determination of people for 
whom clinical research is a vocation.

Unless changes are made, clinical research will remain an impossibility for 
most.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
