
Since the turn of the 21st century, we’ve seen remarkable achievements in 
health on a global level. Economic growth and new technologies can explain some 
of this. But a new book from the Center for Global Development,Millions Saved: 
New Cases of Proven Success in Global Health <http://millionssaved.cgdev.org>, 
captures why a handful of innovative programs and policies implemented around 
the world – from Brazil to Zambia – have worked so well. Take the quiz below to 
find out how much you know about some of the world’s most successful efforts to 
improve health.
In 2002, Botswana recorded 21,000 Aids-related deaths. How many deaths were 
recorded in 2013?  24,000  13,500  5,800 Correct. Thanks in part to the rollout 
of a new antiretroviral treatment program called Masa, meaning “new dawn”, 
Botswana experienced an unprecedented drop of 73% in Aids-related deaths. Even 
one death is too many, but Botswana has made huge progress.  None Why was 
Vietnam’s motorcycle helmet law so successful?  Fines were higher than the cost 
of a helmetCorrect. The law gave riders an incentive to comply: a fine of 
US$6-$12, 10 times the previous penalty, as much as one-third of the average 
monthly income, and, crucially, more than the price of some helmets.  Child 
passengers were covered by the law  The law reduced the number of motorcycle 
riders  The law wasn’t a success What country saw a resurgence of polio in the 
early 2000s but was able to halt the spread of the disease within just a few 
months?  Pakistan  Nigeria  Haiti Correct. Haiti, along with the Dominican 
Republic, halted the resurgence of paralytic polio within a few months between 
2000 and 2001, thanks to a robust surveillance system and immunization 
campaigns. The outbreak was stopped after just 22 cases were recorded. Polio 
eradication remains mostly a success story with no cases in Africa last year. 
Only Afghanistan and Pakistan are still trying to eliminate the disease.  
Afghanistan Which one of the following was not a component of Thailand’s 
tobacco control program?  Tax increases  Restrictions on advertising and 
marketing  Banning all cigarette sales Correct. The 1992 Tobacco Products 
Control Act prohibited selling cigarettes to those younger than 18, banned 
distribution of free samples of tobacco products and forbade the sale of 
tobacco products in vending machines. However, it did not require a complete 
ban on cigarette sales.  Limits on smoking in public places Since 2010, 15 
African countries where meningitis A is endemic have been undertaking mass 
vaccinations with the MenAfriVac vaccine. On average, how many people have been 
immunized each week?  1 million Correct. Since 2010, more than 235 million 
people in 15 countries across Africa have received the MenAfriVac vaccine – 
equivalent to about 1m vaccinations per week. In those areas, meningitis A has 
been virtually wiped out.  500,000  10,000  Fewer than 10,000 Which of the 
following factors made Thailand’s universal healthcare a success?  Dedicated 
leadership across political cycles  Learning from national and international 
experiences  Using the best evidence about costs and impacts to determine which 
services the health coverage scheme includes  All of the above Correct. All 
health programs have a variety of factors that contribute to success or 
failure. In the case of Thailand’s Universal Coverage Scheme, it took, among 
other things: political leadership and will; learning from and iterating past 
experiences; and using a systematic, transparent and robust way to assess the 
potential impact of a healthcare technology such as a drug, therapy or surgery. 
By how much did the prevalence of diarrhea drop after the rollout of a 
sanitation marketing program in East Java, Indonesia?  55%  30% Correct. 
Communities where the sanitation program was rolled out were 23% more likely to 
build a toilet and 9% less likely to practice open defecation, compared to 
villages that did not take part in the program. These behavioral changes 
translated to a 30% drop in the prevalence of diarrhea among people living in 
the target communities. Even better: the program averted 18,500 life-years lost 
due to ill health or early death.  18%  5%  You got…  You know a lot about the 
global health revolution!  You know a lot about the global health revolution!  
You're knowledgable about the global health revolution.  You're somewhat 
knowledgable about the global health revolution.  You're somewhat knowledgable 
about the global health revolution.  Please read Millions Saved and you'll 
boost your score in no time.  Please read Millions Saved and you'll boost your 
score in no time.  Please read Millions Saved and you'll boost your score in no 
time.  Challenge your friends Submit answers 
Want to learn more about the health revolution 
<http://www.theguardian.com/health-revolution/video/2016/mar/22/africa-meningitis-belt-affordable-vaccine-leaders-cooperate-health>
? Read about all of the key findings from thecases in Millions Saved here 
<http://millionssaved.cgdev.org/findings>.

This content is paid for by the Center for Global Development
