
I think I’m developing feelings for you. I say “I think” because I’m still 
confused as to how this came about. I didn’t think it was possible for me to 
develop feelings for a non-Muslim man. I always assumed the lifestyle 
differences would stop anything of the sort from happening. But I was mistaken.

We do seem really different at first glance. You’re a white man, I’m a brown 
woman, and our life journeys have been shaped differently by the implicit 
assumptions that come with those labels. But when it comes to the things that 
matter, such as the values and principles that make up a person’s character, 
we’re really similar. We have similar political views; we care about the same 
causes and laugh at the same jokes. I don’t drink alcohol or eat pork, but I 
have close friends who do and those trivial differences never came between them 
and me.

I am in awe of what a beautiful heart you have. I know we haven’t known each 
other for that long, but from working with you over the past few months, I’ve 
been able to see how compassionate you are. It’s remarkable how much humility 
you have because you have every reason to be arrogant: you’re intelligent, 
successful and incredibly handsome. Most people with your privileges are often 
indifferent to others’ struggles. But despite all that you have going for you, 
you’re still such a caring person who never fails to make me smile. Your 
constant effort to stand up for the downtrodden doesn’t go unnoticed. I guess 
that’s what has left an impression on me.

I’m not expecting much to come of my confession. It’s probably for the best if 
nothing were to come of it. Not because my family won’t accept you or anything 
like that – I haven’t even thought that far ahead – and I know my family love 
me enough to put my happiness above everything. But because I’m worried about 
how your friends, family and society in general would perceive my being with 
you. I know interfaith relationships can make people uncomfortable, not to 
mention the stigma that is attached to being closely associated with a Muslim. 
I would never want to be the reason why there is a strain on your life.

I wonder if you find me attractive, or if my headscarf has registered me as 
off-limits in your mind

In addition to societal pressures, there’s also the fact that, technically, 
you’re like my boss. I really hope you understand that I mean no disrespect by 
telling you that I’m attracted to you, and my intention is not to make you 
uncomfortable. The last thing I would want to do is sever our professional ties.

Besides, I don’t know if you’re seeing someone. Have you even considered 
dating a Muslim girl? I wonder if you find me attractive, or if my headscarf 
has registered me as off-limits in your mind. That would explain why you 
haven’t noticed my poor attempts at flirting – believe me, it’s no accident 
that I always “love” your tweets. And whenever I thank you for the thoughtful 
things you say and do, it’s coming from the deepest part of my heart.

I don’t know what you made of that random invitation to coffee the other day. 
There was no real reason for it. I just wanted to hang out with you. I 
thoroughly enjoyed discussing life and literature with you in the quaint little 
French cafe you suggested. I didn’t want it to end. As soon as we parted ways, 
I was already looking forward to the next time I’ll see you. At that same time, 
I came to terms with the sad fact that this is probably all there will be to 
“us”.

It is unfortunate that I won’t be able to openly express or explore my 
feelings for you. Believe me, I would love to show you how I feel. But I’d 
rather keep it to myself than put our budding friendship in jeopardy.

Considering the many complicated layers of our situation, it seems that there 
are more risks than benefits. I’d rather you were the one that got away, and 
still have you in my life as a friend than lose you completely.

Anonymous
