
Lord Adonis, the former Labour transport secretary, has come up with an idea 
to combat Britain's London-centricity – moving theHouse of Lords 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> to the north of England. 
"A relocated Lords would allow peers to add something new to the political 
process," he writes in the March issue of Reader's Digest. "In the north, the 
voices of manufacturing industry and rural Britain would be far stronger than 
they are in the south-east."

Of course as presently constituted – nearly 800 overpaid and largely useless 
unelected party placepeople – the only realistic location for the Lords is the 
bottom of the Thames. But Adonis has that covered: he wants the move to take 
place only when the institution has been reformed, slimmed down, democratised.

So far, so good. But where? This has long been a pet scheme of Adonis's, and 
when he mooted it in 2012 Guardian readershad some excellent ideas 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/apr/19/move-house-lords-london-adonis>
: Blackpool Tower (with the clowns); a disused industrial estate in Dewsbury; 
Scunthorpe; the Outer Hebrides; Mars. York also featured a great deal, but was 
deemed too posh by some – a white, affluent subset of London.

It seems to me, though, that Adonis does not go far enough. He says selling 
off the Lords' property portfolio – all that expensive office space along 
Millbank – would raise a huge amount of cash. But the real prize would be to 
sell off the Palace of Westminster itself: what a hotel that would make! That 
means the Commons has to move too.

Going to a great city in the Midlands or the north – Birmingham, Manchester, 
Liverpool, Leeds, Newcastle – would just create another bubble. There would be 
tax advantages in doing what some sports governing bodies have done and moving 
to Dubai, or it could, banking-style, try offshoring the whole thing to 
Bangalore to cut costs. Another possibility is a monastic island community, 
perhaps Iona or Lindisfarne, which would certainly cut down on expenses.

In truth, though, there are only two possible solutions. First, parliament 
could be migratory, like Question Time – Truro this week (if the railway ever 
gets fixed), Todmorden next. Its arrival would cause tremendous excitement 
wherever it went, like the circus coming to town.

Alternatively, put the reformed parliament – 500 MPs, 250 elected "senators" – 
in the dead centre of the country. Coventry has long claimed to be the centre 
of England and, with its wonderful cathedral and second world war associations, 
is a worthy candidate. Leamington Spa also claims to be England's central spot, 
and is certainly dead enough. But let's assume Scotland will not secede, and so 
seek out the centre of the UK for our new, truly national parliament. That 
is Lancaster, at the junction of Fenham Carr Lane and Wyresdale Road to be 
precise. This is where our great new, inclusive, streamlined, efficient, 
democratic, non-sleazy, duckhouse-free institution should be sited. A 
parliament fit for the 21st century rather than the 19th.
