
Sanjive on Jane

What were you hoping for?
Some nice chit-chat and company.

First impressions?
Nice smile, and she’d made the effort to look great – I loved her white fluffy 
coat.

What did you talk about?
Meditation, yoga, plant-based diet, India, our children, the civil service, 
the tax office.

Any awkward moments?
No, she was posh but nice.

Good table manners?
Yes, we were both relaxed.

Best thing about Jane?
Her smile. We also had a lot to talk about and share.

Would you introduce her to your friends?
Yes.

Describe her in three words
Fragrant like mango.

What do you think she made of you?
Hopefully kind. I listened to her, on a human level, and we connected. The 
evening did not last long enough.

Did you go on somewhere?
I had tickets to The Nutcracker 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/the-nutcracker-by-peter-wright> at the Royal 
Opera House.

And... did you kiss?
Of course – an Indian smooch (I’m too shy to elaborate).

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
More time. And maybe a chance for me to teach her a bit of meditation and yoga 
during the interval at the ballet.

Marks out of 10?
8.

Would you meet again?
Yes, I have invited her to dinner at my place.

Jane on Sanjive

What were you hoping for?
An exciting evening, probably a new friend, possibly more.

First impressions?
Nice eyes and a great smile. I felt immediately at ease.

What did you talk about?
Yoga, families, work past and present, India, happiness.

Any awkward moments?
A menu briefly caught fire on a candle.

Good table manners?
Impeccable.

Best thing about Sanjive?
He’s comfortable in himself, and will give anything a try.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
Yes, they would like him.

Describe him in three words
Open, unaffected, adventurous.

What do you think he made of you?
I think/hope he found me interesting and nice.

Did you go on somewhere?
He had tickets for the ballet.

And... did you kiss?
A kiss on the cheek.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
More time in the restaurant.

Marks out of 10?
Has to be a 10.

Would you meet again?
Definitely. We live in different cities and are planning a visit.

• Jane and Sanjive ate at Rossopomodoro 
<http://www.rossopomodoro.co.uk/restaurant/covent-garden/>, London WC2.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com <>

For a free three-day trial, go to soulmates.theguardian.com <>
