
Scottish voters hoping that a vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> could spark a second independence 
referendum should first consider their “solidarity with people across the 
continent”, Jeremy Corbyn has suggested.

The SNP leader and Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, has repeatedly said that 
a vote to leave the European Union could trigger another vote on Scotland’s 
future, and former Tory prime minister Sir John Major said earlier this week 
that a vote to quit the EU could “tear apart the UK”.

During a campaign visit to Aberdeen on Saturday, Corbyn said Major “may be 
right”. While he accepted “the SNP would want to promote another referendum” in 
such a scenario, he said: “I think we should not get into that debate at the 
present time, the important thing is to decide how you are going to vote on 23 
June.”

Corbyn added: “I hope people will vote for what they want and decide whether 
they wish to be part of the European Union or not on the basis of solidarity 
with people across the continent.”

The Labour leader’s visit to Aberdeen came after senior figures in the Labour 
party, including Tom Watson, Ed Miliband and Chuka Umunna, urged the party to 
step up itscampaign to stay in the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/labour-party-urges-voters-to-prevent-drift-towards-brexit>
 amid fears that Labour voters would let the UK sleepwalk towards Brexit. There 
has been concern from parts of the party that their leader has been lukewarm in 
his backing for remain.

“I don’t think the European Union is perfect, nobody does,” Corbyn told 
reporters inScotland <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>,adding: “I do 
think the working time directives, the employment rights that have been 
achieved by trade unions across Europe and enshrined in European law are very 
important.”

He said a vote to remain is “not an endorsement of every bureaucratic excess 
of the European Union”, claiming what is important is “a principle about 
working with people across national borders”.

He also said David Cameron had made a mistake in not allowing 16- and 
17-year-olds to vote in the referendum as young people provide a 
“counter-momentum” to the apparent rise in support for the leave campaign. “I 
supported votes at 16 and do, it’s the policy of theLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party to lower the voting age to 
16 for all elections. It was achieved in the Scottish referendum and that was 
right and I think it should be extended.

“Large numbers of young people have registered to vote, young people are more 
likely to want to vote to remain because they enjoy the free movement across
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> if they choose to study 
and travel. Older people tend to be more sceptical, I think that’s 
disappointing, but it’s not universal.”

Corbyn argued the decision on the UK’s future membership of the EU must not be 
made “on the basis of xenophobia or attacks on all foreigners” and condemned 
claims from leave supporters that the NHS would be better off if Britain was 
out of Europe.

“The reality is if you go to any hospital across the UK, you’re more likely to 
be treated by a doctor from another part of Europe than you are to be queuing 
up beside a patient from another part of Europe,” he said. “52,000 European 
nationals work in our NHS – well done them and thank you very much. If they all 
went I think we would have a problem.”

He said he was disappointed with the result of an Aberdeen University study, 
which suggested 92% of fishermen in the UK would back a leave vote. He accepted 
there had been “a lot of arguments over the common fisheries policy over the 
years” but that “to leave the European Union won’t solve the problems of the 
fishing industry”.

For the leave campaign, Iain Duncan Smith, the former work and pensions 
secretary, claimed the tactics of the remain camp were “definitely showing 
panic”.

Duncan Smith, a prominent figure in the campaign to leave the EU, was mobbed 
by remain backers dressed as Boris Johnson during a visit to Harlow town centre 
in Essex on Saturday. The protesters shouted “he cut benefits, what else is he 
going to cut?” and “where is Boris” at the former cabinet minister as he 
stepped off the battle bus to canvas voters. “It does suggest to me when people 
do this sort of stuff that they are really worried,” Duncan Smith later told 
reporters.

The incident took place during a difficult day for the remain camp, after an 
online poll for the Independent put the campaign for Britain to leave the EU 10 
points ahead of its opponents. The survey of 2,000 people by ORB found that 55% 
of Britons believed the UK should leave the EU, up four points since the 
newspaper’s last poll in April, while 45% wanted it to remain, down four points.

 Duncan Smith said the poll made it clear the public was responding to the 
Vote Leave message but insisted that it was “all still to play for”. He told 
the Press Association: “I am astonished at remain at the moment. They are 
breaking all the normal rules you’d ever make about a successful campaign. You 
never show panic and they are definitely showing panic at the moment. This 
personal abuse, the old rule of thumb in politics is that once you start 
getting abused you must be doing something right. They seem to have given up on 
any positive messages. In the debate the other day there was literally no 
attempt by Amber Rudd [the pro-EU environment secretary] to say anything 
positive.”

He added that he was “happy for the abuse” because “the more personal abuse 
they fly the better it is for us – people don’t like it”. He said: “I just want 
to win this, I don’t care what happens to me personally. I believe if we are an 
independent nation again the British people will thrive and prosper – like the 
prime minister once said, but he doesn’t say it any more.”

 The Chingford and Woodford Green MP, who stepped down as work and pensions 
secretary over “indefensible” benefit changes, also said he “doesn’t believe a 
word” of the claims that Brexit would mean £18bn of welfare cuts and tax rises, 
and rubbished comments by the German finance minister,Wolfgang Schäuble, who 
said the single market door would be shut 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
 to Britain if there was a vote to leave.

 “I predict there will be a line-up now of European Union finance ministers 
saying they will never do a deal with Britain over the next two weeks,” Duncan 
Smith said. “One by one they are all going to threaten us and that’s great 
because the public does not like being threatened, as we saw with Mr [Barack] 
Obama. Everyone should recognise that what you say in the run-up to a 
referendum is different from what you actually say when it has been 
established. Second biggest economy in Europe, fifth largest in the world, what 
are you going to say: ‘We are not going to trade with you’? I don’t think so.”

 The comments echoed those of Sir James Dyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/11/sir-james-dyson-dismisses-brexit-trade-fears-as-cobblers>
, the inventor, who on Friday night backed the leave campaign and called claims 
that British international trade would suffer outside the EU “absolute 
cobblers”. Speaking to the Daily Telegraph, Dyson criticised employment 
restrictions for non-EU workers as “crazy” and vented frustration that some 
British-trained engineers were unable to stay after graduating from university. 
He said doing business on the continent had left him with the belief that EU 
powers “protect vested interests” and called Cameron and George Osborne 
fundamentally wrong in campaigning to remain.

Related: No single market access for UK after Brexit, Wolfgang Schäuble says 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>

 “I don’t just mean from the business point of view, I mean from the point of 
view of sovereignty,” Dyson said. “We will create more wealth and more jobs by 
being outside the EU. We will be in control of our destiny. And control, I 
think, is the most important thing in life and business.”

 The remain campaign did receive a boost, however, after Nobel laureates 
including Prof Peter Higgs, whose predictions were tested in the large hadron 
collider at Cern, the graphene pioneer Sir Kostya Novoselov and geneticist Sir 
Paul Nurse, warned that Britain’s future as a world leader in scientific 
research was being thrown into jeopardy by “naive” Brexit campaigners. The 
group said Britain currently helped “steer the biggest scientific powerhouse in 
the world” and wielded greater influence than it would alone on the outside.

In a letter to the Daily Telegraph they wrote: “Science drives our prosperity, 
health, innovation and economic growth. It should be front and centre in the EU 
debate. As British science Nobel laureates, we are concerned that those 
commenting on science for Brexit lack experience in scientific leadership, and 
are putting the superb UK research endeavour in jeopardy.”
