
Sophia Loren once said, "Everything you see I owe to spaghetti" - she was 
clearly doing her bit to contribute to the staggering 28kg of pasta (that's dry 
weight) a head that the average Italian consumes each year. Or, in her case, 
14kg a hip. Here in the UK, we swirl our way through a measly 4.5kg each. My 
family does better than that, but since it hits our table at least once and 
more likely twice a week, I write about pasta all too rarely. Time to set the 
record straight.

I'm not a true pastaphile, in the River Cafe/Jamie Oliver sense. I don't go 
all gooey about it. I love pasta for the same reason families everywhere love 
it - it's the perfect get-out-of-jail-free card.

"What's for supper?" yells one of the kids, snacking on a pencil as he does 
his homework.

"Er, I thought we'd have ... pasta with, er, bacon and ..." - glance around 
for something vaguely vegetacious - "... er, bananas?"

"That sounds disgusting. Can't we have it with bacon and cheese?"

"Oh, all right. Just this once. As a special treat ..." Everyone wins, see?

It doesn't have to be much more complicated to please grown-ups. Simple 
spaghetti silkily, slinkily dressed in olive oil, garlic and chilli does it for 
us. Or, for instant winter comfort, try a cosy walnut sauce: chop a few 
handfuls of walnuts, sweat in olive oil with some garlic, add a slug of cream, 
bubble to reduce, stir in a handful of freshly grated Parmesan, season and toss 
with tagliatelle or quills, and you're done.

While I'm all for authenticity, I must admit I reserve my deepest affection 
for the 70s approach to pasta embraced by my Mum, with a little help from the 
then thoroughly modern Katie Stewart. I'm thinking of the high tea treats of 
macaroni cheese, and the Saturday night dinner party special of homemade 
lasagne. So today I'm revisiting these homey classics, my madeleines, in a sort 
of remembrance of things pasta.

For all these recipes, dried pasta is absolutely fine, but I would encourage 
you to make your own once in a while - just follow the instructions in your 
Jamie Oliver book of choice. That's what we do. But use Dove's Farm organic 
pasta flour if you can. It works an absolute treat.

The one dish on today's list that will really shine with homemade pasta is my 
lasagne. The recipe, based on Katie Stewart's, is the ultimate.

Lasagne

The secret to a great lasagne is quality of the sauce, and the key to that is 
coarse ground beef and long, slow cooking. Serves six to eight.

For the meat sauce:

1 tbsp olive oil
1 good knob butter
1 medium onion, finely chopped
1 stick celery, finely diced
1 large carrot, finely diced
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped
125g streaky bacon, finely diced
750g coarsely ground beef 
100g free-range chicken liver, chopped fine (optional)
Salt and ground black pepper
250ml whole milk
A couple of gratings of nutmeg
250ml dry white wine
400g tinned chopped tomatoes
500ml beef stock
2 bay leaves

For the béchamel:

750ml hot milk, infused with a bay leaf and a slice of onion
50g butter
50g plain flour
A grind or two of nutmeg
Salt and ground black pepper
10-14 lasagne sheets (depending on size of dish), fresh or dried 
60g Parmesan grated
About 20g butter

First, make the meat sauce. Warm the oil and butter in a large saucepan over a 
medium-low heat. Add the onion, celery and carrot, and sweat until soft, about 
10 minutes. Add the garlic, bacon, beef, liver and a large pinch of salt, and 
brown the meat. Add the milk and simmer, stirring frequently, until the milk 
has mostly evaporated. Add the nutmeg and wine, and simmer until the wine 
evaporates.

Stir in the tomatoes, stock and bay leaves, bring to a simmer, then turn down 
the heat so it's barely bubbling. Cook, uncovered, for three hours (yes, 
really), stirring from time to time. Add a little stock or water if it looks as 
if it's drying out too much - if using dried pasta, keep the sauce a little 
more liquid.

Preheat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4. Make the béchamel as for the 
macaroni cheese (see next recipe), add half the Parmesan, and season with 
nutmeg, salt and pepper.

To assemble, spoon a quarter of the béchamel in the base of an ovenproof dish 
followed by a layer of bolognese and a layer of pasta. Repeat, finishing with 
the last quarter of béchamel on top of the third layer of pasta. Sprinkle over 
the remaining Parmesan and dot with butter. Bake for 25 minutes, until golden 
and bubbling. Allow to cool slightly before serving.

Macaroni cheese

Don't be alarmed at the quantity of sauce to pasta: to get really silky, 
creamy macaroni cheese, it should be quite fluid before you bake it. Add 
chopped cooked bacon or ham to the mix, if you like. Serves six.

1 litre milk
1 bay leaf
70g unsalted butter, plus extra for greasing
70g plain flour
¼ tsp cayenne pepper
400g fairly strong cheddar, grated
Salt and ground black pepper
300g macaroni
50g Parmesan, grated (or cheddar)
4 tbsp fresh breadcrumbs

Preheat the oven to 200C/400F/gas mark 6. Put a large pan of water on to boil, 
then make the sauce. Pour the milk into a pan, add the bay and warm gently 
while you make the roux in another pan. Melt the butter over low heat, add the 
flour and stir for a few minutes. Add a quarter of the hot milk, whisk into the 
roux, then slowly add the rest of the milk, whisking all the time to ensure 
there are no lumps. Turn the heat to low and simmer for five minutes, stirring 
frequently. Add the cayenne and cheddar, stir until the cheese has melted, then 
season well.

When the water is boiling fiercely, add lots of salt (about 20g for every two 
litres of water) and the pasta. Cook it for two minutes less than it says on 
the packet, then drain.

Grease an ovenproof dish with butter. Stir the pasta into the sauce, then pour 
it into the dish. Mix the Parmesan and breadcrumbs, sprinkle over the top, and 
bake for 25 minutes, until golden and bubbling. Allow to cool slightly before 
serving.

Minestrone

It's important to cut the vegetables into small pieces, even dice. If you have 
the rind from a chunk of Parmesan, add it to the broth - it adds a real depth 
of flavour. Serves six.

3 tbsp olive oil
130g pancetta or streaky bacon, cut into cubes
2 carrots, diced
1 onion, diced
1 stick celery, diced
2-3 cloves garlic, finely chopped
200g potatoes, peeled and cubed
40g Savoy cabbage, finely shredded
1-2 tsp fresh thyme leaves, chopped
400g tinned chopped tomatoes
1.2 litres good chicken stock
400g tin cannellini beans, drained and rinsed
70g small pasta, such as macaroni or tubetti
3-4 tbsp chopped, flat-leaf parsley
Salt and ground black pepper

In a big pot, warm the oil over medium heat, then add the pancetta and sauté 
until just golden. Add the carrot, onion and celery, lower the heat and sauté, 
stirring, until soft, about seven minutes. Add the garlic, potatoes, cabbage 
and thyme, and cook until the cabbage wilts. Add the tomatoes, stock and a 
pinch of salt, and simmer, partially covered, for 40 minutes. Add the beans and 
pasta, and simmer for 20 minutes. Add more stock if it looks a bit thick. 
Taste, season and stir in the parsley. Serve with Parmesan (or hard goat's 
cheese) shavings.

theguardian.com/hughfearnleywhittingstall 
<http://www.theguardian.com/hughfearnleywhittingstall>

• Reader offer: to order a River Cottage Christmas goose hamper, packed with 
seasonal, artisan goodies and a signed 2009 diary, go to
rivercottage.net/guardian <http://www.rivercottage.net/guardian>
