
An US company founded by the chairman of a London-based academies trust has 
been paid more than £125,000 by the trust over the past two academic years, its 
accounts reveal. Aspirations Unlimited International (AUI) was paid for its 
“intellectual property and materials plus consultancy support”, which included 
travel and subsistence costs for its founder, Dr Russ Quaglia.

Quaglia is the chairman of the Aspirations Academies Trust (AAT) which, as we 
reported 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/31/academies-school-governors-skills-qualifications>
 last month, runs nine academies in the south of England. The trust’s 2013-14 
accounts say that AUI charged AAT “at or below cost” for its services, meaning 
the firm says it did not make a profit.

The academy chain said the fees included the provision of surveys and 
resources, extensive support and training in their use, speakers at senior 
leadership conferences and travel and accommodation for Quaglia, whose 
commitment “goes far beyond what could reasonably be expected for a chairman”.

Nevertheless, the AAT seems to be an organisation to keep an eye on.

The right answers to academy questions

A federation of three comprehensives in Lewisham, London, is under fire for 
allegedly “biasing” its consultation on whether the schools should transfer to 
academy status. Theconsultation 
<http://www.prendergast-school.com/245/parent-feedback-form> by the 
Leathersellers’ Federation includes four substantive questions, three of which 
are prefaced by a statement from the federation in favour of the plan. For the 
final question, two possible downsides of conversion are mentioned, but then 
seemingly rejected by the federation.

No alternative proposals for Prendergast Hilly Fields, Prendergast Vale and 
Prendergast Ladywell schools are set out.

The proposals have been subject to student and teacher protests 
<http://www.southlondonpress.co.uk/News.cfm?id=27257&headline=%27PUPILS%20GO%20ON%20STRIKE%27>
 in recent weeks.

David Sheppard, the federation’s executive headteacher, said the document was 
not skewed and that the extensive consultation also involved meetings with 
parents, staff, pupils and unions. “We believe that the range of information we 
have put into the public domain and the processes we have enabled ensure this 
consultation is fair and unbiased.”

Pupils bid goodbye to once-happy Bisham

Five months ago, it was a school where parents were said by Ofsted 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/n3u0j9sh6wevjs8/bishaminspectionautumn2014.PDF?dl=0> 
to like the “happy family atmosphere” and pupils enjoyed coming to lessons. 
After inspectors nevertheless failed the school saying that pupils were not 
making enough progress in tests, the local authority suspended the long-serving 
headteacher and there was an exodus of staff. Now it has lost almost half its 
pupils, with the prospect of losing more.

Is the story of Bisham primary, in Marlow, Buckinghamshire, a case study in 
how intervention in schools can go wrong? Bisham had 108 pupils on 21 November, 
we understand. This was the day the headteacher, Jim Cooke, was suspended after 
the school was put into special measures. His supporters say it now has only 58 
pupils as parents have taken children away – seemingly because of unhappiness 
at how the school operates, although the local authority says some parents’ 
criticisms of its efforts have driven others away.

Another 16 pupils are understood to have requested to leave the school but 
have yet to do so and Bisham – which had 74 applicants for 16 reception places 
last year – is not understood to be deluged with applicants for this September. 
With these numbers, we wonder if the school’s long-term viability is at stake.

Alison Alexander, Windsor and Maidenhead borough’s director of children’s 
services, said: “Since November 2014 … the school has been hindered in its work 
through a minority of parents who did not want any change. They have driven 
[other] parents away. We can confirm [that the school] is not at risk.”

Central problem of local freedom


Finally, a curious letter comes our way. David Laws, pictured, the Liberal 
Democrat schools minister,wrote 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/sjdvtduuu829qce/davidlawsletter29315.pdf?dl=0> to 
Bradford metropolitan district council on 29 March to express his 
“disappointment” about its schools’ exam results.

Bradford, he wrote, had below-average results for Sats tests taken by 
11-year-olds and a high proportion of pupils were in secondary schools with 
below-average scores on the government’s new GCSE performance measure, while 
its disadvantaged pupils fared worse than their counterparts elsewhere.

“I am sure that these results concern you as much as they do me, and that you 
will be considering how you can improve,” Laws wrote to Michael Jameson, 
Bradford’s children’s services director. “I would very much like to hear from 
you within the next month about the plans that you are putting in place.”

What strikes us is the central control implied by this, from a party committed 
to more localism. Indeed, the Lib Dems 2010 manifesto said: “Liberal Democrats 
want an education system where all schools will have the freedom to innovate, 
not be dictated to by central government.” Laws’s letter may imply a strange 
kind of freedom for local authorities and their schools.

Warwick Mansell is the author of Education by Numbers: the Tyranny of Testing
