
This summer, my wife and I are living in a secluded part of rural upstate New 
York. It's been kind of a Walden Pond-type experience for us. As you may 
recall, Walden Pond is the small pond in Massachusetts where Henry David 
Thoreau, American philosopher, went to experience seclusion. He resolved to do 
nothing but sit and think and write, and was so dedicated that a word was 
coined in his honour: if someone is very devoted to a task, we Americans will 
say he is "being very Thoreau" about it. A person might be said to be "giving 
her house a Thoreau cleaning", or to be "Thoreauly sick and tired of Henry 
David just sitting there thinking and writing, when all of the rest of us are 
giving our houses a Thoreau cleaning".

Having a word named after you is perhaps the best litmus test of true fame. 
Case in point - the word "litmus" came to us via Charles Litmus, a famous 
scientist who would turn blue whenever acid was poured on him. This made him 
very popular at parties, but also made him Thoreauly angry. No one wants to 
have acid poured on them. Unless, of course, it is 1968 and the person in 
question is a hippie with his mouth wide open.

Things didn't turn out happily for Litmus. In time, he became a recluse and, 
in fact, lived next door to Thoreau, who, when taking a break from not doing 
any work whatsoever, could often be seen lurking outside Litmus's shack, 
waiting for Litmus to undress for the evening, so he could rush in and dump a 
container of acid on Litmus, just to see if the rumours were true.

The best thing about our summer has been that, like Thoreau's shack, our house 
has no internet, and hence, no email (named, interestingly, after the great 
French writer, Email Zola). Before the internet, people would sit around 
reading books and discussing the burning issues of the day, no matter how dull 
they found this. If they wanted to send a letter, they had to write it and mail 
it; and if they wanted porn, they had to get on their horse and ride to town, 
hire a model, invent the camera and wait for the developing technology to be 
perfected; and if they wanted to send all their life savings to a woman named 
Eleanor, whose late husband had been prime minister of Nigeria, they had to 
build a wooden ship and sail it to Nigeria. It was a simpler time for which, I 
confess, I am nostalgic - and hence I close this piece with one last invocation 
of a person whose name has entered the language: I refer, of course, to Leonard 
Nostalgia, born with a neck defect that forced him always to look backwards, 
and a facial defect that set his mouth permanently in a fond grin.
