
Far from compromising your commitment to your career, having a family can 
unearth the motivation to start a new business, or to grow an existing one.

While expanding your business might be the furthest thing from your mind in 
the bewildering days following childbirth, being a parent can actually be good 
for business. Arecent survey 
<https://business.yell.com/knowledge/is-it-possible-to-juggle-a-small-business-and-a-family/>
 of 1,500 small business owners, conducted by Yell Business, found that 79% of 
parents consider their business to be “very successful” and “quite successful” 
compared with 67% of non-parents.

The reasons for this are threefold, says Alexis Kingsbury, who founded the 
Parentpreneur Accelerator 
<http://www.makinggreatness.com/the-roadmap-for-a-successful-parentpreneur/> 
last year. He says that first off, your definition of success changes. “With 
parentpreneurs, it doesn’t need to become a billion dollar enterprise,” he 
explains, adding that goals can shift to “a good income, financial freedom and 
ability to spend time with family”.

There’s also the age and experience factor. And thirdly, your social circle 
often widens when you have children, whether through antenatal courses, NCT 
groups or meeting other parents at playgroups.

“You become part of other communities,” says Kingsbury. “It can result in 
getting connected with interesting people.” This can mean meeting valuable 
contacts, a potential mentor – or even future collaborator.

According to Justine Roberts, Mumsnet CEO, many women find their ambitions 
crystallise when they have children.

“We see a lot of Mumsnet users talking about setting up their own businesses 
and asking each other for advice on business strategy and financing.”

Broadcaster and mother of two Faye Dicker <http://www.freelancemum.co.uk/> set 
up a digital hub to support mums in business because she missed the 
water-cooler moments of her working life after her children were born.


“We have a monthly meet-up and ‘netwalk’ which is a little bit bonkers but 
somehow works,” she says. “The kids all come along in pushchairs or on scooters 
so we walk at the pace of the slowest toddler, but it’s a chance to build 
business connections and talk with other mums.” Members then listen to a guest 
speaker over coffee and cake, provided by a sponsor, while the children do a 
craft activity.

“What people love about it is not having to explain yourself in any way or 
apologise for having kids – follow-up meetings happen in play cafes with no 
need to juggle them around childcare.”


Dicker says connections made via the digital hub have led to valuable business 
opportunities for its members. “The founder ofTrunki <https://www.trunki.com/> 
was a recent guest speaker and a couple in the hub who run a graffiti business 
ended up graffitiing Trunki’s head offices.”


Ann Nkune, who founded Bloomsbury Beginnings CIC to help parents work more 
flexibly, felt that, while there were opportunities for parent entrepreneurs to 
network, there was nowhere to go to discuss their challenges.

 “I was a mum of a two-and-a-half year old at the time and was trying to 
juggle wanting to go back to work with wanting to make the most of getting a 
baby at the age of 41 that I didn’t expect.” Nkune was thinking about career 
change and many of the women around her were as well. Then a friend of hers 
took her own life.

“She had two young kids. She was much more isolated than we had all realised 
and she’d been suffering from domestic violence. It hit a lot of us quite 
hard,” she says. “We realised that our networks were nice smalltalk networks, 
but we didn’t have the opportunity to talk about all the more tricky things we 
were dealing with as parents. It made sense to do something that brought us 
together.”


Since starting in 2013, 80 people have been through Bloomsbury Beginnings’ 
Parent-Cubator programme, which delivers workshops on social media, financial 
management, branding and building a business plan. Outside of this programme, 
there are individual sessions to discuss the challenges of being a parent 
entrepreneur and pilates classes to help with stress management. It also has an 
on-site creche.


Nkune dismisses the idea that groups specifically aimed at parent 
entrepreneurs disadvantage those without children: “The vast majority of 
networking opportunities are where or when parents can’t access them – the 6pm 
to 8pm slot in the evening is an absolute nightmare for parents as it’s dinner 
and bedtime. Without creche provision on site, it is very difficult for parents 
to attend such events.”


Paul Allington, who launched his home business The Code Guy in January 2015 
when his daughter was three months old, agrees that many business networking 
events are at tricky times for those with young families. The father-of-two, 
who lives in Saffron Walden and was IPSE’s Freelancer of the Year last year, 
says: “There’s a lot of breakfast networking, but mornings can be really 
hectic. Children don’t like getting dressed in the morning. It would be good to 
have some events in the middle of the day.”

Hazel Theocharous runs small business training consultancy Learn Grow Transform
 <http://learngrowtransform.com/> and says the real benefit of meeting other 
parent entrepreneurs is getting support from those who appreciate the 
challenges of growing a business while raising a family.

Theocharous moved from Australia to London with her family in 2013 and met a 
life coach through a networking event, who became a personal friend and helped 
her keep her business goals in sight while adjusting to life in a new country.


“Regular networking events can only take you so far in growing a business,” 
she says. “Find someone local who can act as a sounding board and support your 
drive and ambition, but also identify with the realities of being a parent in 
business. When you’re a parent with business ambitions it’s vital to connect 
with people who will gently spur you on towards those.”


Roberts, of Mumsnet, agrees that parents take inspiration from others who have 
been there and done it. “Tapping in to the experience and know-how of people 
who’ve been in your shoes can be immensely powerful.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
