
A Commons committee report blaming Britain’s membership of the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> for the government’s failure to deport 
13,000 foreign offenders was only passed on the casting vote of its chairman, 
Keith Vaz.


The claim that the government’s record on deporting foreign national criminals 
would lead the public “to question the point of Britain remaining a member of 
the EU” split the Commons home affairs committee down the middle, with a 4-4 
deadlock broken by Vaz’s casting vote.

The committee’s endorsement of an anti-EU position on such an emotive issue 
was seized on by the justice minister and leave campaigner Dominic Raab, who 
claimed that even a leading Labour remain campaigner, Chuka Umunna, who sits on 
the committee, was now questioning staying in the EU. Umunna was not present 
when the vote was taken on the key passage in the report.

The home secretary, Theresa May, defended the government’s record and denied 
that Britain’s EU membership was a hindrance. “Foreign nationals who commit 
crimes here should be in no doubt of our determination to deport them,” she 
said. “Last year we removed a record number of foreign national offenders from 
this country, including a record number of EU criminals.

“Being in the EU gives us access to criminal records sharing and prisoner 
transfer agreements which help us better identify people with criminal records 
and, allow us to send foreign criminals back to their home countries to serve 
their sentences.”

The home affairs committee’s quarterly report on the immigration system also 
says it must “seriously question” an “extraordinary” decision by the Home 
Office to attempt to deport thousands of overseas students on the basis of 
“questionable or insufficient” evidence that they had cheated in English 
language tests.

Vaz said the Home Office’s “arrests, dawn raids and aggressive deportations” 
of students from outside the EU stood in stark contrast to the failure to 
remove foreign offenders.

“There are still over 13,000 foreign national offenders in the country, who 
could fill towns the size of Louth in Lincolnshire, Beccles in Suffolk or 
Berwick-upon-Tweed in Northumberland, and almost 6,000 of these are living 
within communities,” he said.

“The public would expect our membership of the European Union to make it 
easier to deport European offenders, but this is clearly not the case, and we 
continue to keep thousands of these criminals at great and unnecessary expense. 
These failures are undermining confidence in the UK’s immigration system and in 
the UK’s EU membership.”

Umunna accused leave campaigners of trying to hijack the committee’s report 
for their own political gain. “Our partnership with countries across Europe 
makes it easier for us to deport hundreds of foreign criminals each year. There 
are clearly some inefficiencies, but there is no doubt our membership of the EU 
is a help not a hindrance in clearing the backlog of foreign national 
offenders,” he told the Guardian.

“Any attempt to portray the findings of this report as a reason to leave the 
EU would be wrong, deeply misleading and another example of how desperate the 
leave campaigns have become. As leading law enforcement heads have said time 
and time again, Britain is stronger, safer and better off as part of Europe.”

Raab said the report showed that the EU was making it more difficult to remove 
dangerous criminals. He claimed that “even the in campaign’s political 
champion” Umunna was now questioning the point of remaining in the EU as a 
result of the report.

Related: Referendum voting papers sent to some EU nationals by mistake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/referendum-voting-papers-sent-to-eu-nationals-by-mistake>

The report highlights the fact that the two largest groups of foreign 
offenders in prison in England and Wales are the 983 from Poland and 764 from 
Ireland. About 4,000 of the 13,000 foreign national offenders are from EU 
countries.

The Ministry of Justice said both groups had special status and could not be 
sent home. No Irish prisoners, save for exceptional cases, have been sent back 
since a 2007 bilateral agreement that has nothing to do with the EU. There is 
also a block on sending prisoners back to Poland until the end of 2016 as it 
has an exemption under the EU prison transfer agreement because of lack of 
capacity in its jails.

The committee’s report says the 13,000 foreign national offenders who have not 
been sent home include 5,789 living in the community, more than half of them 
for two years or more. The number of those living in the community is the 
highest since 2012.

The MPs report that deportations have been steadily increasing and the 5,602 
foreign offenders removed in 2015 was the highest number since 2009.
