
People are increasingly heading to social media such as Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> for news, making it more 
difficult for publishers to attract and make money from readers, according to 
an influential new report.

The annual report on digital news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/16/news-outlets-face-losing-control-to-apple-facebook-and-google>
 from the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism highlights the 
inexorable rise of sites such as Facebook, YouTube and Twitter, the rapid 
transition to mobile and a consumer backlash against digital ads as undermining 
traditional publishers’ business models.


RISJ’s 26-country study finds that more than 50% of all web users use social 
media for news each week, with increasing numbers saying it is their main 
source. While many publishers have linked with Facebook and Google to 
distribute their news, the report warns that social media sites are becoming 
destinations in their own right.

Related: Facebook endorsements are good for news sites, but where's the money? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jun/07/facebook-endorsements-are-good-for-news-sites-but-wheres-the-money>

The report found that in countries such as the UK and Canada the news 
organisation that published the story was “clearly noticed” less than half of 
the time when read on social media.


In countries such as Japan and South Korea, where news distribution is already 
much more widespread, the news brand is only noticed by the reader about a 
quarter of the times a story is accessed through an aggregator.


“The move towards a more distributed environment offers publishers 
opportunities to reach new audiences on an unprecedented scale,” said Rasmus 
Kleis Nielsen, director of research at the RISJ.


“But as people increasingly access news via third party platforms, it will 
become harder and harder for most publishers to stand out from the crowd, 
connect directly with users, and make money. This development will leave some 
winners and many losers.”


Facebook is by far the dominant social media news source with 44% of those 
surveyed using it to find, read, watch, share or comment on news each week. 
This is more than twice its nearest rival.

Unsurprisingly, social media news reading is strong among young people, with 
28% saying it is their main source of news, outstripping the proportion who 
cited television (24%) as their top source for the first time.


The importance of TV news more generally is waning, with all groups under 45 
saying that online sources are more important than broadcast.

The use of mobile devices to access news has risen to 53% of respondents 
globally from 37% just two years ago.


However, the use of tablets for news reading has fallen in the UK.


The report also questions whether publishers may be “backing the wrong horse” 
when it comes to investing heavily in video production.


Across the 26 countries surveyed just 24% of respondents said that they access 
online news video in a given week.


“This represents surprisingly weak growth given the explosive growth and 
prominence on the supply side,” report said. “The main reasons people give for 
not viewing more video is that they find reading news quicker and more 
convenient and the annoyance of pre-roll ads.”


Paying for online news continues to be unpopular with readers.


No English-speaking country in the survey has a payment rate of more than 10%, 
with readers seeking out free sources in an intensely competitive market for 
digital publishing.


The UK rate was joint lowest in the 26 country survey, at 7%, but those that 
do pay have one of the highest annual spent amounts per person at £82 a year.


And the report found the UK is notable for having a high proportion of ongoing 
subscriptions.


Despite the broadly negative picture painted by the report, it is not all 
gloom for traditional news publishers.


It notes the continuing importance of a number of “anchor” news brands 
globally that are valued by consumers as a critical source of trusted news.


Although the way news is consumed is shifting fast, the report found that most 
of the content still comes from newspaper groups, broadcasters or newer digital 
brands that have invested in original content.


However, main usage online remains with brands that have a strong news 
heritage and have been able to build up a reputation over time.


“It is clear that news is as popular as ever, and distinctive journalism is 
still valued by consumers,” says David Levy, director at RISJ.


“New brands are not yet replacing older ones in terms of the quality and range 
of output. The problem of how to pay for high quality but costly journalism 
becomes more pressing than ever.”

