
Archant <http://www.theguardian.com/media/archant>, the Norwich-based regional 
newspaper publisher, saw turnover fall by 4.7% in the first six months of this 
year, down by £3.1m to £63.3m.

But operating profit, following cost reductions of £4.5m and the inclusion of 
exceptional items, was up by 80.9% or £1.6m,

The private company's interim statement showed its operating profit to be 
£600,000, which was £1.5m better than the loss of £900,000 in 2012.
 Jewson: London is challenging 
Chairman Richard Jewson said strong cost control had been the key to improved 
profitability, and that he was "pleased" with the financial performance of the 
group that publishes four daily regional newspapers, including the Eastern 
Daily Press and Norwich Evening News, and around 50 weekly titles.

"There is much comment that green shoots of recovery are becoming visible," 
said Jewson. "As yet we see little evidence that this is building confidence 
amongst our customers.

"Whilst there is some evidence of a strengthening economy we have seen little 
of this in the consumer markets we serve."

Jewson spoke of a "relatively strong" performance by Archant's Anglia and 
lifestyle divisions - which also publish 80 magazines - with declines of less 
than 3%. But trading in London, where its magazines face significant 
competition, is "more challenging."

He concluded: "Digital revenues in all divisions continued to grow, with an 
overall increase of 18% on the same period last year.

"We anticipate the group performance for the full year will be in line with 
target and well ahead of 2012."

He also addressed the controversy of the company's dispute with the tax 
authorities (HMRC) 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/mar/12/archant-profits-tax-bill> over 
corporation tax and interest dating back 10 years. It has made a provision of 
up to £13m as a possible payment.

According to Jewson, it involves "complex matters of interpretation and 
judgement" and the company is "continuing to engage in correspondence with them 
[HMRC] and we expect this to continue in the coming months."

Source: Archant
