
“It’s been a great first job out of university”


Amber Lydiate, 23
Analytical fast stream
Government operational research service

I did a maths degree but wasn’t sure what I wanted to do through university. I 
wanted to use my analytical skills and do a job that would be challenging and 
allow me to keep learning. When I stumbled across the fast stream the 
analytical stream appealed to me. I still wasn’t entirely sure what I wanted to 
do so the diversity of it and the way you are rotated around different 
departments really appealed.


I started on the analytical fast stream where I worked in the central 
management unit for the government operational research service, and then moved 
into an analytical team in HMRC. I expected it to be quite a steep learning 
curve and that’s definitely been the case but it’s been a great first job out 
of university. There are long days in the assessment process but you really 
feel like you’ve accomplished something and the people are really supportive.


My tips for new applicants: You need a bit of patience because it’s a long 
process. If you get stuck on a question in the online tests don’t panic because 
you can come back to it at the end, and if you still don’t have the answer just 
guess – wrong answers don’t lose you any marks.


In the analytical stream there’s an extra assessment but they don’t expect you 
to know everything, and the assessors are trying to get the best out of you 
rather than trip you up. Make sure you know what competencies they are looking 
for and prepare examples from your life to demonstrate that you have them.


Related: How to join the civil service fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>

“It’s a very good scheme for career switchers”

Brian Webber, 44
Human resources fast stream
Cabinet Office

I’m a career switcher so I don’t fit the traditional brief of a graduate 
straight out of university, but the fast stream provided a good opportunity to 
move into HR to develop my career goals. I started in the civil service for 
about six years, then left for the private sector and ended up in teaching, but 
the fast stream allows for that level of diversity. It’s a very good scheme and 
they’ve been mindful of the previous experience I’ve had and have tailored my 
experiences for it.

Fast streamers in the HR stream also get both a Chartered Institute of 
Personnel and Development qualification and a master’s degree in human resource 
management all funded as part of the process. The fast stream has given me the 
opportunity to get these qualifications and high-level experience.

My tips for new applicants: Get a good night’s sleep and be prepared for 
anything. Assessment centres really do put you through your paces. It’s a long 
day and there’s a lot of roleplay. They assess a number of attributes such as 
how you deal with policy under pressure, how you respond to emails, how 
creatively you think, your presentational skills and how you might deal with 
scrutiny. It really is key just to be yourself.

“On my second day I wrote a submission to go to Vince Cable”

Emma Sharp, 25
Generalist fast stream
Department for Education

I wanted to work in the public sector and make a difference but I hadn’t got 
set ideas about what I wanted to do so the generalist fast stream has been 
excellent and I’ve loved it. You work in three departments and complete a 
secondment in the first two years, and then the plan is to do two more one-year 
placements and go back to one of the departments you worked in before. There’s 
a lot of change and they make sure your experience is very different. You get 
policy, commercial, financial and operational experience over the two years. 
It’s challenging but you learn a hell of a lot.

The main thing that stands out for me is the amount of responsibility you get 
and how early you get it – on my second day I wrote a submission to go to Vince 
Cable. The other is how much people look out for your development. You’re 
really encouraged to think about your long-term development in the context of 
your wider career. I’ve never thought about my development as much in my entire 
life as I have since being in the fast stream!

My tips for new applicants: There are no surprises so make sure you know what 
is being tested. All the information is there so you can definitely do the 
research. Make sure you do as much preparation as possible.

They want to make sure there’s a variety of ways that people think. For a 
generalist, they are looking for people who work well in a team, take other 
perspectives into consideration and can formulate and articulate an argument 
well.

Related: What to do if you don’t get on the civil service fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>

“For the first few months I thought my brain would explode”

Rebecca Chapman, 28
Diplomatic service fast stream
Foreign and Commonwealth Office

I joined the Foreign Office in November 2012 on the diplomatic fast stream. 
You spend two years in London and are then normally released on an overseas 
posting. I went into it open minded, with no real expectations, but I’m coming 
to the end of my second year and I’ve had an amazing time. For the first few 
months I thought my brain would explode.


In the first year you get a policy job in London and in the second year you 
get a more operational job. The idea is that you get lots of experience and 
become an all-round officer before being sent overseas. There are so many jobs 
and I’m looking to apply for one at the moment and am checking every month for 
posts in places like New York or Brussels.


My tips for new applicants: Preparation is key in terms of approaching what 
can seem like a long, daunting process. There are a lot of assessments to get 
through, especially for the Foreign Office, but there’s lots of advice and help 
available online. You need to become familiar with the type of people, skills 
and thinking that the government is looking for. You need to really absorb and 
embody it.

“Each role has brought a new challenge”

Siju Salami, 29
Digital and technology fast stream
Department for Work and Pensions

It’s been quite exciting. The roles have been varied and each has brought a 
new challenge and the opportunity to do something that has a big impact on the 
public sector. I knew that IT in government was big and the challenges were 
going to be big too, but this has exceeded my expectations. I’ve also learned a 
lot about how to work with, engage and influence other people.


I spent the first two years at the Department for Work and Pensions. It’s is 
an organisation of people who have a great sense of purpose and they are really 
committed to helping others and lifting people out of poverty.


My tips for new applicants: Make sure you understand what the civil service is 
all about and its values. Research the competencies of a civil servant and be 
honest with yourself about where you stand. The assessment centre is an intense 
day but the best you can do is to enjoy it, take each exercise one at a time 
and don’t worry too much about exercises you’ve already completed. Remember 
that you have multiple chances to demonstrate the competencies that are being 
tested.

Read more:

 * How to join the civil service fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/civil-service-fast-stream-how-to-join-graduate-careers>
 * What to do if you don’t get on the fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/03/civil-service-fast-stream-other-routes>
 * How to get a job in the public sector 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/01/public-sector-jobs-top-employers-career>
 * Why I halved my salary to join the fast stream 
<http://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2014/sep/17/civil-service-fast-stream-halved-salary-join>
Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> here for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>
