
Nine out of 10 people who have gone through the family courts, under new rules 
that heavily restrict access to legal aid, suffer strain in their mental and 
physical health, working lives and finances, according to a report byCitizens 
Advice <https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/> due out this week.

It adds that the system is not set up to deal with “litigants in person”, 
people who represent themselves in court proceedings, primarily because they 
cannot afford a lawyer.

“The demands of going to court without legal representation can put people’s 
jobs and health at risk,” said Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice.


“For people representing themselves in the family courts, whether in a divorce 
case or to keep the legal right to see their children, the workload can be 
unmanageable. In extreme cases people are quitting their jobs so they have the 
time to do research before going to court.”

The number of people going to court without a lawyer has been rising since 
access to legal aid was cut severely in 2013. Poorer people and those with 
children are more heavily represented in those litigating in person than any 
other group.


There has been a 30% rise in cases where neither party has access to legal 
help and a 22% rise in such cases involving children. Seven in 10 people report 
not going to the courts at all, leaving their issues unresolved.

Of those who chose to be litigants in person, 90% reported a negative impact 
on their everyday lives.

In January the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, delivered a 
warning about the legal aid situation in England and Wales. “Our system of 
justice has become unaffordable to most,” he said. “In consequence, there has 
been a considerable increase of litigants in person for whom our current court 
system is not really designed.”

London architect Anna would agree. She has endured a bruising divorce case 
during which she could not afford a barrister – she was paying the mortgage on 
the family home – but her former husband could.

“I lost a lot, not knowing how the law worked, how the court worked, what the 
language should be, how to even talk to the judge,” she said. “It is so 
frightening from the moment you walk in the door.”

She continued: “I was told off by [one judge], I felt so humiliated. I hadn’t 
realised earlier paperwork was not admissible because my ex-husband’s lawyers 
had written ‘without prejudice’ on it. I lost.


“I couldn’t get justice because I couldn’t understand the justice system. My 
girls suffered, I suffered and then I was accused of being emotionally 
unstable. It impacted and still does on every single aspect of my life.”

Citizens Advice and Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP have developed a free 
online tool,called CourtNav, <http://www.courtnav.org.uk/> which gives people 
access to a lawyer when submitting a divorce petition.
