
Let me begin by making the most obvious declaration of interest. I am writing 
onThe Guardian website about the redesign of The Independent, which is this 
paper's most obvious rival for a left-of-centre serious audience.

So you might just want to take that into account when I say that the front 
page of its first revamped issue today is ghastly. I just hope that the reborn 
Indy editor,Simon Kelner, is self-critical enough to acknowledge that I am, if 
not entirely objective, being sincere.

I would guess that he faced the problem of not wanting to make the front into 
a poster-style "viewspaper" cover, redolent of his former approach. On the 
other hand, he wanted to make it eye-catching.

In fact, the "Sack Goldmans!" headline (with tabloid-style exclamation mark) 
does hark back to his old Indy while the juxtaposition of an unrelated picture 
- about the air chaos - looks clumsy. Nor am I wowed by the size of the 
masthead.

The slogan "Free from party-political ties/Free from proprietorial influence" 
is a reassertion of the Indy's independence, which is fair enough. But the 
claim in the page 2 blurb about independence being "something no other paper 
can claim" is, of course, a nonsense.

Then again, I'm bound to say that because The Guardian can lay even greater 
claim to a similar independence from party or proprietor, given that it 
stretches back to its foundation in 1821.

OK, that's enough of the Indy-Guardian sport. I have to say that the inside 
pages look clean - helped by an absence of ads - and the configuration is 
sensible.

The Viewspaper central section - a label clearly chosen to echo Kelner's 
original neologism during his previous period as editor - works well enough. 
It's a mixture of commentary (including an excellent column byDominic Lawson), 
analysis, reviews, letters, obits and an essay. Not certain about the front 
page of that section either, but it does draw the eye and may well lead readers 
inside.

Overall, the 68-page paper looks good and feels good. It bounces along with 
pace. It is also the best presentation since Kelner turned it into a compact in 
2003.

One small oddity. Across pages 16 and 17 is an American Express ad that runs 
from top left to bottom right, meaning that editorial copy has to be squeezed 
around it. I know the paper is desperate for revenue, but does it really need 
to sell the pass in such an absurd fashion to advertisers?

I'd be pleased to hear what other readers think...
