
Unconscious bias affects every area of our lives. Unconsciously, we tend to 
like people who look like us, think like us and come from backgrounds similar 
to ours. Everyone likes to think he or she is open-minded and objective, but 
research has shown that the beliefs and values gained from family, culture and 
a lifetime of experiences heavily influence how we view and evaluate both 
others and ourselves.

These thought patterns, assumptions and interpretations – or biases – we have 
built up over time help us to process information quickly and efficiently. From 
a survival standpoint, bias is a positive and necessary trait. In business, 
however, bias can be costly. It can cause us to make decisions that are not 
objective; and ultimately we miss opportunities.

Women now account for 20.7% of board members in FTSE 100 companies, according 
to a recent report by Lord Davies. Whilst this may be a significant improvement 
on the 2011 figure of 12.5%, it is still a long way from gender parity. Could 
the reason behind this be the unconscious bias not only of men, but also of 
women themselves?

Our aspirations too tend to reflect the current norm and, with relatively few 
women in key roles, women's unconscious beliefs about career advancement could 
be holding them back from reaching the top. Bias comes in many forms, from 
assuming you need to take on more "masculine" characteristics to succeed, to 
doubting your abilities and strengths.

These biases are reinforced when we read articles about roles models such as 
Christine Lagarde, the first female leader of the IMF, who recently revealed 
that when she was starting out she was warned by a reputable company in France 
that she would never be made a partner because of her sex. It's easy to think 
think to ourselves: "If it happened to her, surely it will happen to me."

While all these biases protect us from the fear of failure, they also hold us 
back from reaching our true potential. So what can we do to change this?

Helena Morrissey 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2013/apr/18/helena-morrissey-big-challenge-below-boardroom>
, chief executive of Newton Investment Management, believes that "the arguments 
are that you need diversity of thought and diversity of perspective".

To achieve this diversity in the boardroom, companies must invest in their 
female talent and nurture them through the ranks.

Christine Lagarde  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2011/jun/30/christine-lagarde-women-progress-politics>
agrees: "I'm the single voice constantly in a room full of men, it's only going 
to carry the organisation so far. Where I think it really makes a difference is 
when I can endorse the middle management, or upper-middle management and make 
them – generally in the minority – make them comfortable, confident, prepared 
to shake their views."

However, to begin a real process of change, women also need to look at their 
own unconscious bias and move away from these potentially damaging beliefs. 
Assumptions are internal; they come from within us and before any external 
change can be made in a company's culture, they need to be understood.

We must unlearn our current beliefs and relearn new ones. If there are no 
suitable role models in our surrounding environment, we have to create our own 
definition of what makes a great leader and become advocates for ourselves.

Trang Chu is an executive coach and founder of Tallgrass Leaders 
<http://www.tallgrassleaders.com/>. Prior to founding Tallgrass Leaders, she 
was a managing director at Deutsche Bank and Merrill Lynch.
