
With carnival kicking off next month, the bar and club owners of Copacabana 
and other tourist traps will be licking their lips at the prospect of how much 
money they'll make from gullible tourists. But it doesn't have to be that way. 
There's nothing Cariocas (Rio folk) enjoy more than hanging out in their 
favourite bar, and the ones we've chosen are all classics, part of the fabric 
of the city. Many are smallbotecos, local watering holes, ideal spots to cool 
off, hang out with the locals and get a beer for under £2 or a caipirinha for 
less than three.
If you've got a favourite local bar in Rio, please post a comment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2011/feb/10/best-bars-rio-de-janeiro#start-of-comments>
.

Bar Brasil, Lapa

Walk into Bar Brasil and you get a snapshot of what the city was like in the 
middle of the last century, when Rio was still the capital of a booming Brazil 
and Lapa was its cultural and intellectual heart. This Rio institution opened 
in 1907, around the same time as the hulking wooden fridge that lurks in the 
corner and dispenses the beer. With high ceilings, white-washed walls, white 
tablecloths and old-school bow-tied waiters, the place has an air of Rio's cool 
glamorous past about it. At lunchtime it's full of businessmen from Rio's 
commercial centre tucking in to German and Brazilian dishes; at night you get a 
younger crowd – Bar Brasil has benefited from Lapa's resurgence over the last 
decade, which has been led by the fabulousRio Scenarium 
<http://www.rioscenarium.com.br/> music bar nearby.
What to eat: One of the German specialities, such as white salsicha branca de 
vitela (veal sausage), or the frango defumado (a whole/half smoked chicken).
• Avenida Mem de Sá, 90, Lapa (+55 21 2509 5943)

Azul Marinho, Arpoador, Ipanema
 Arpoador beach. Photograph: Alamy 
In a city with so many bars and beaches, it is uncanny that the two rarely sit 
side by side. One noteworthy exception is the classy Azul Marinho 
bar-restaurant on Arpoador beach, an extension of Ipanema, one of the best 
places in Rio to watch the sun set. Sit at an outdoor table just a few feet 
from the beach and look along the sweeping stretch of Ipanema backed by the 
Dois Irmãos (Two Brothers) mountains (pictured). It's a little pricier than 
some of the other bars mentioned here but it's hard to picture a more memorable 
sundowner. In summer it can reach 40C in Rio, and Arpoador is where Cariocas 
(Rio folk) come to cool down with a beer and a moonlit dip.
What to eat: The restaurant specialises in seafood; try a moqueca (a 
deliciously rich seafood stew cooked in palm oil and coconut milk) or whole 
fish baked in salt.
• Avenida Francisco Bhering, Arpoador (+55 21 2513 5014)

Jobi, Leblon
 Rio, Jobi bar Photograph: Steven Chew 
Bottled cerveja may be the drink of choice in every other city in Brazil, but 
in Rio it ischopp, a light, refreshing draught beer served with a creamy head 
in tall glasses. And Jobi, a Rio institution dating back to 1956, has 
quasi-official status as the home of the best chopp in town. Sales of around 
10,000 glasses of beer per week attest to this, as do the crowds spilling out 
of the boteco and on to the pavement tables. It is only two blocks back from 
the beach in trendy Leblon, and gets packed and a bit messy later on – in a 
good way.
What to eat: The kitchen makes some of the best empanadas in town – try the 
camarão (prawn) variety. On Saturday there's a great feijoada, or for a snack 
thecaldo de feijão (the tasty, salty broth skimmed off the top of the beans). 
• Rua Ataulfo de Paiva 1166, Leblon, (+55 21 2274 0547)

Bracarense, Leblon
 Photograph: Alamy 
It's small and nondescript, but Bracarense has legendary status among Rio 
drinkers. That's probably because it gets just about everything right, from the 
zinc-topped bar and excellent service, to the cold beer, delicioussalgadinhos 
(bar snacks) and generous measures in the caiprinhas (the waiter almost filled 
my glass with cachaça from a gallon bottle). There's a happy hour feel and 
bawdy mixed crowd, everyone from post-work to post-beach punters, all stopping 
off for a quick bite and ageladinha (ice-cold beer) on the way home. Though if 
you're lucky enough to get a pavement table (there's often a queue), it's 
tempting to stick around for the duration and watch Rio go about its business.
What to eat: Try any of the salgadinhos – bolinhos de aipim or bacalhau (fried 
cassava or cod balls), or thepernil (pork sandwich).
• Rua José Linhares 85, Leblon (+55 21 2294 3549)

Bar do Mineiro, Santa Teresa
 Photograph: Alamy 
Santa Teresa is Rio's villagey, boho neighbourhood, home to a flourishing 
artists' community, and it's well worth taking the rattly old tram up the hill 
from the centre to see the many attractive colonial buildings. The place to 
meet is Bar do Mineiro, a lively, friendly joint with old black and white 
photos of Rio on one wall and bright colourful paintings above the bar. It 
serves up hearty meaty dishes from the neighbouring state of Minas Gerais, also 
the home of Brazil's finest cachaça (sugar cane spirit). So, as you'd expect 
from a bar carrying this name (Mineiros are Minas natives), there's a an 
extensive selection of cachaças here. My caipirinha was flawless, and the bar 
also does abatida de gengibre, a ginger and cachaça cocktail – an aphrodisiac 
apparently. If you're here late at night, take a taxi back down the hill.
What to eat: Minipastéis de feijão (deep-fried bean pasties). The Saturday 
feijoada (a bean and meat stew, Brazil's national dish) is a corker by all 
accounts.
• Rua Paschoal Carlos Magno 99, Santa Teresa (+55 21 2221 9227) 

Armazém São Thiago (Bar do Gomez), Santa Teresa
 Rio, Bar do Gomez 
Bar do Gomez, as the locals call it, is the Brazilian boteco straight out of 
central casting: the location is perfect, on a busy, picturesque corner of a 
cobbled street; the high ceilings and old photos andbujinganga (a nice word for 
junk) on the walls give it a timeless feel (the place has barely changed since 
this photo was taken in 1923); and you could bottle the atmosphere and sell it 
to bars around the world. By the end of the night the pavement was swarming 
with friendly drinkers who'd had one chopp too many. If I lived in Rio, I'd 
spend far too much time in here.
What to eat: Whatever's coming out of the kitchen: emapanadas, meat croquettes 
with mustard or crisp bolinhos de bacalhau with chilli sauce
• Rua Áurea 26, Santa Teresa (+55 21 2232 0822, armazemsaothiago.com.br 
<http://www.armazemsaothiago.com.br/english.html>)

Bar Urca, Urca
 Photograph: Alamy 
It's all about the view here – and the legendary salgadinhos. Grab a cold beer 
and a few nibbles from the selection on offer at the enormous counter, cross 
the street and sit on the sea wall, watch the fishermen come in and look across 
the water to Guanabara Bay and Christ the Redeemer. This peaceful area is off 
the beaten track but worth the stroll once you're here – it's close to the 
city's naval base, so completely safe to do so.
What to eat: Whatever looks good – the pastel de camarão (fried prawn pasty), 
orfrango (chicken) or siri (crab) empanadas usually are. Or there's a posh 
restaurant upstairs.
• Rua Cândido Gaffrée 205, Urca (+55 21 2295 8744, barurca.com.br 
<http://www.barurca.com.br/>)

Cervantes, Copacabana
 Rio, Cervantes bar 
These days Copacabana is about as fashionable as the Barry Manilow song of the 
same name – or Rod Stewart or Mick Jagger, two of the many famous names who 
have eaten in Cervantes. The tiny 56-year-old bar – round the corner from its 
equally famous sister restaurant – hasn't bothered moving with the times 
either, which is its charm. It's full of beer-bellied, flip-flop-wearing old 
blokes shooting the breeze (Copacabana is a haven of retirees, the Brazilian 
Eastbourne) and, later on, night owls refuelling on the meatiest, tastiest 
sandwiches you'll ever eat. The counter is bulging with huge beef fillets and 
legs of pork and ham, which the waiters hack off and stuff in to a roll with a 
slice of pineapple. Delicious with a chopp. Standing room only.
What to eat: The sanduiche de pernil com abacaxi (pork sandwich with 
pineapple, pictured) is the classic. One would feed two for a proper meal, let 
alone a snack. The beef looked fabulous, too.
• Rua Barata Ribeiro 7, Copacabana (+55 21 2275 6147, 
restaurantecervantes.com.br <http://www.restaurantecervantes.com.br/>)

Bar Lagoa, Lagoa

 Rio, Bar Lagoa 
This beautiful art deco bar overlooks, and takes its name from, the city's 
small lake (as if there isn't enough coastline to keep everyone happy) which 
will stage the rowing and some of the kayaking events when the city hosts the 
Olympics in 2016. The pink marble walls and small balcony - where an orchestra 
once played - date back to the 1930s, when it opened as Bar Berlin. Anti-war 
demonstrations forced a name change, but it still serves excellent white wurst, 
potato salad and sauerkraut with kassler, and the draught Bohemia chopp is 
well-kept, as you'd expect in a German bar. Just don't expect Germanic 
efficiency – it's a longstanding local joke that the grumpy, indolent waiters 
are part of Lagoa's "charm".
What to eat: Any of the above or the steak sandwich. 
•Avenida Epitácio Pessoa 1674, Lagoa, Ipanema (+55 21 2523 1135, 
barlagoa.com.br <http://www.barlagoa.com.br/>)

Braseiro de Gavéa, Gavéa
 Rio, Gavea 
Squashed between the two illustrious neighbourhoods of Jardim Botanico and 
beach-front Leblon, Gavéa is overlooked by many visitors to Rio, and here lies 
part of its charm. The Braseiro de Gavéa is unmissable as it is in the area's 
main square and always heaving with hopeful diners spilling out across the 
payment and into the street as they vie for tables inside. To keep everyone 
happy and well-fuelled, a small bar in a side window dishes out chopp, 
caipirinha and dishes of grilled sausage and chicken hearts andbolinhos de 
bacalhau. The small Sunday market in Baixa Gaveá ensures the bar is bustling 
from the moment it opens, and Monday evenings are traditionally the night for 
the young and the young at heart to throng to Gavéa. A real Rio joint.
What to eat: Picanha (grilled cap of sirloin) served with rice, black beans 
and all the trimmings. It will serve three.
• Praça Santos Dumont, 116, Gavéa (+55 21 2239 7494, braseirodagavea.com.br 
<http://www.braseirodagavea.com.br/>) 

• My guide and drinking partner was Steven Chew, owner of the Brazilian Beach 
House Company <http://www.brazilianbeachhouse.com/houses.php>, which offers 
luxurious villas, beach houses and private islands all over Brazil, including a
three-bedroom apartment 
<http://www.brazilianbeachhouse.com/assets.php?cat=houses&location=Rio%20de%20Janeiro&id=72>
 overlooking the lagoon in Ipanema, sleeping six, from US$4,130 (£2,641) per 
week, or $98 (£62) pp pn. Alternatively, theHotel Villa Corcovado 
<http://www.villacorcovadorio.com/> (+55 21 3511 5381) has double rooms from 
around £144 per night, including breakfast, tax and Wi-Fi.
TAP (flytap.com <http://www.flytap.com/index.php?object=2040>) flies from 
London to Rio de Janeiro from £639 return including taxes.
For more information on visiting Brazil, go to braziltour.com 
<http://braziltour.com/home.html>
