
An official review of the application of sharia law in England and Wales has 
been launched by the home secretary,Theresa May 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>.


The review forms part of the government’s counter-extremism strategy and will 
be carried out by a Home Office-appointed panel chaired by Prof Mona Siddiqui 
and including family law experts and a retired high court judge. The panel is 
to be advised by two imams who are religious and theological experts.

May said the review would look into whether, and, if so, the extent to which 
sharia law was being misused or applied in a way that was incompatible with the 
rule of law in Britain. It would also assess ways in which sharia law may be 
causing harm in communities.

The inquiry was expected to be completed by 2017. 

The Home Office said there was evidence that some sharia councils were working 
in a “discriminatory and unacceptable” way, contrary to the teachings ofIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>, such as seeking to legitimise forced 
marriage or issuing divorces that were unfair to women.

May said: “Many British people of different faiths follow religious codes and 
practices, and benefit a great deal from the guidance they offer.

 “A number of women have reportedly been victims of what appear to be 
discriminatory decisions taken by sharia councils, and that is a significant 
concern. There is only one rule of law in our country, which provides rights 
and security for every citizen.”

When the home secretary raised the prospect of such an inquiry in March 2015 
she said there was evidence of women being “divorced” under sharia law and left 
in penury. She also said wives were being forced to return to abusive 
relationships because sharia councils said a husband had a right to “chastise”, 
and that sharia councils were giving the testimony of a woman only half the 
weight of that of a man.

Siddiqui, a professor of Islamic and inter-religious studies at the University 
of Edinburgh, said: “It’s a privilege to be asked to chair such an important 
piece of work. At a time when there is so much focus on Muslims in the UK, this 
will be a wide-ranging, timely and thorough review as to what actually happens 
in sharia councils.”

The Home Office stressed that it would not be a review of the “totality” of 
sharia law, which is a source of guidance for many Muslims in Britain.

It would examine the role of particular groups and Islamic authorities, and 
the role of sharia councils and Muslim arbitration tribunals. The panel would 
also look at divorce, domestic violence and custody cases.

The panel includes the retired high court judge Sir Mark Hedley, the family 
law barrister Sam Motaz, and the family law lawyer Anne Marie Hutchinson QC. 
They will be advised by Imam Sayed Ali Abbas Razawi, a lecturer in philosophy 
and theology, and Imam Qari Asim, who is chief imam at Leeds Makkah mosque.
