
I have the best memory of eating this simple pudding on a rather chilly day in 
May in an old Cumbrian longhouse owned by food historian Ivan Day. The apples 
were baked in an authentic wood-fired stove and filled the house with that 
unmistakably comforting scent apples give to a breeze in the air. They came out 
of the oven black as if they’d been to hell and back, and were eaten after a 
deliciously memorable meal in the company of the most diverse of food history 
enthusiasts.


I was told by my host that this is the original toffee apple. Recipes for 
toffee apples only appeared around the end of Victorian times, while venerable 
publications such as the Yorkshire Evening Post on 14 July 1896, warned of the 
“dangers” of this new craze among the young. For black caps, a few recipes can 
be found in the 18th century; each writer has their own way of creating this 
dish, so I would say make it your own by altering it to your taste.

Take six large apples, and cut a slice off the bottom end, put them in a tin, 
and set them in a quick oven till they are brown, then wet them with rosewater, 
and grate a little sugar over them, and set them in the oven again till they 
look bright, and very black, then take them out, and put them into a deep china 
dish or plate, and pour round them thick cream custard, or white wine and 
sugar. It is a pretty corner dish for either dinner or supper.

Elizabeth Raffald, The Experienced English Housekeeper, 1782  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Experienced_English_Housekeeper>

The recipe

Serves 6
6 dessert apples, such as jonagold or orange cox
about 2 tbsp sugar, to sprinkle
1 tbsp orange flower water or rosewater
A naughty drizzle of Grand Marnier (orange-flavoured liqueur) or brandy 
(optional)


Preheat the oven to 200°C (400°F). Wash the apples and slice off a strip of 
the skin around the middle to prevent the apple from popping. Sprinkle the 
apples with sugar. Arrange them in a baking tray and drizzle the rosewater or 
orange flower water over so each apple has some splashes. Bake in the oven for 
30 minutes.

Remove from the oven, sprinkle with a little more sugar and add Grand Marnier 
or brandy, if using, before the apples go back in the oven. Makes for a rather 
festive dish, but is not a must. Put them back in the oven for a further 30 
minutes until quite tender but not reduced to pulp. The apples should be 
blackened, hence the name black caps.

Fabulous with custard, clotted cream and ice cream, I mostly enjoy them with a 
thick, strained yoghurt for breakfast or an afternoon nibble.

Cooking over a fire?

To use the Dutch oven method, place a heatproof dish holding the apples on a 
trivet in your Dutch oven. Fire the coals and let them go grey, then stand the 
pot over the coals on a trivet and place some of the coals on the Dutch oven’s 
lid. As fire is unpredictable I can’t give you an exact cooking time, but check 
after 30 minutes; if they aren’t already well on their way, the coals aren’t 
hot enough.

Regula Ysewijn’s Pride and Pudding is available from the Guardian bookshop here
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/390346/>
