
A 14-year-old girl who was born as a result of donor fertilisation and is now 
embroiled in an “extraordinary” high court case has been ordered to stay in 
touch with her two “fathers” against her wishes.

The teenager, who has been at the centre of litigation between her two fathers 
and two mothers for half her life, was represented by a lawyer at a private 
hearing in the family division of the high court and invoked provisions of the 
1989 Children Act in an attempt to persuade a judge that she should be left to 
“reach her own conclusions”.

But Mr Justice Cobb has ruled against the girl and decided that it is in her 
best interests to have a “limited form of relationship” with her fathers.

The girl, who has a 10-year-old sister, lives with their biological mother in 
London who is in a civil partnership with another woman. Both girls were born 
as a result of donor insemination. Their biological father is in a civil 
partnership with another man. Neither girl has been named and were referred to 
in court as A and B.

Cobb said the mothers had also argued against the teenager being made to stay 
in touch with her fathers.

The judge said he acknowledged and respected the teenager’s “well-developed 
autonomy and independent thinking”. But he ruled that her fathers should be 
allowed to send her cards, letters and gifts, and said she was likely to 
benefit from the “modest but important link” with them.

Cobb described the litigation as “extraordinary”. He said the fathers had not 
had any routine contact with the girls for many years and neither girl wanted 
to see their fathers.

Both had spoken of the legal proceedings ruining their childhoods. They said 
their fathers were solely to blame for the protracted litigation, which began 
in 2008.

But the judge said the men “wish to emphasise that they love the children, 
they always will, they will always be there for them and interested in them. 
They hope that the children will one day look back at the happy times of 
contacts enjoyed in the past.”

He added: “They would seek orders for indirect contact in the hope that it 
will happen, maintaining a link with the children on which, they hope, further 
relationship will build.”

Cobb said both girls had “promising futures”, “bright and inquisitive minds”, 
enjoyed good health and were well cared for by their mothers. But he went on: 
“The significant void in their lives is the lack of any meaningful relationship 
with their fathers.”

He added: “I remain clearly of the view that the fathers have something of 
real value and importance to add to the lives of the girls.”
