
If you've got kids and you love snow, you'll appreciate the frustration of 
those wilderness years when you're forced to ditch the annual winter holiday 
and spend your money on a Bugaboo instead. Rejoice, then, when your little ones 
reach the age when they, too, can hit the slopes.

But when mum snowboards and the children are about to start skiing, there's a 
potential problem. With my eldest nearing three and already wanting to start 
"sliding like Daddy" (a skier), I had a dilemma on my hands. Could I keep them 
safe on the mountain if they were on skis and I was on a board? Guiding them 
down the mountain is probably a lot easier when you're not balanced on your 
heels or toes. And I'm guessing that containing a tantruming package of fury 
might be difficult when you're strapped to a plank, not least because the time 
taken to undo your bindings gives the kid a five second head start when they do 
a runner. So as a first step, this mama was clearly going to have to get back 
into skiing.

Courchevel 1850 has this season been rebranded as simply Courchevel. The 
highest of the four Courchevel villages is known as a playground for the 
stupidly rich and famous, when it comes to skiing, but it's also a great place 
for beginners and families to learn to ski. (Money doesn't buy you respect on 
the slopes people!)

It's there I don my skis, tactically crashing as I get to the lift, and 
Barnie, my instructor, gets us going. I've got three child-free days to improve 
my skiing from bad to good-enough-to-be-better-than-the-kids. We start out in 
Courchevel Moriond (previously 1650) on the blue runs around Ariondaz, where 
the wide pistes are in tip-top condition, thanks to a bumper dump of snow a few 
days earlier.

My group of five is mostly young and childless, with the exception of Jo, 
who's an engineer. "We stopped skiing when we had children," she says. "It was 
too stressful and too expensive. I started again 19 years later, when they had 
left home!"

"Lean forward," shouts Barnie, as I tentatively point my skis, in a slight 
snowplough, down the Ariondaz piste. Skiing when you've snowboarded should, in 
theory, be easier than starting from scratch. After all, I'm used to sliding. 
But at the moment I'm petrified – being a mother seems to heighten your 
awareness of risk and I'm not keen on being a beginner again. We start with 
basics: pressure, edges and confidence.

"You're squatting. Don't sit down. You're not on a board!" says Barnie. 
Blushing at my lack of finesse, I push my weight forward and feel the skis in 
contact with the piste, at which point a 15-strong crocodile of little Lego men 
overtakes me. They speed past, bottoms on the back of their skis and their arms 
flapping.

"Many kids take to skiing straight away, even if their technique is terrible," 
says Barnie. With echoes of "Muuum, you're soooo embarrassing," echoing in my 
ears, the incentive to get to grips with skiing seems pressing.
 Skiers learn to negotiate a chair lift in Courchevel 
The next day another instructor, Lorenzo, takes away my poles and encourages 
me stand taller to initiate the turns as we head through the woods towards La 
Tania, Courchevel's "alternative" sister (and the only one not to be renamed). 
The scale, variety and superior grooming of Courchevel's pistes, along with its 
lift systems and snowmaking, means learners and intermediates have some of the 
best snow in the Alps. Thomas Thor Jensen, director of operations for the Three 
Valleys resort, says there are plans to invest another €125m in the resort over 
the coming years to "improve the slopes further".

But the resort is also extremely keen to point out that it's not all about 
five-star luxury. Nathalie Faure Bernoud of the tourist board tells me: "At Les 
Verdons restaurant, Coca-Cola is cheaper than in McDonald's. And at the 
Michelin-starred Azimut in Le Praz, you can eat three courses for €28."

As another school of tiny skiers pass me on the perfectly groomed Folyères 
piste I hear them chanting, "As tall as a house, as small as a mouse." I adopt 
their mantra and, hey presto, it works.

Despite the significant presence of fur-clad ladies with small dogs (also in 
fur coats) under their arm, Courchevel is family-friendly. The Village des 
Enfants boasts the "largest ski area in the world for kids", with 5km of very 
gentle child-only pistes, its own lift, rope tows and magic carpets. Children 
as young as 18 months start by sliding on tiny skis in soft supple boots, while 
over-threes have more formal lessons in the snow playground. The Village also 
has a chill-out room (with TV) and canteen. And if your little one doesn't 
enjoy the experience, you'll get your money back.

Once your children are up and skiing, there are themed areas on the mountain 
that add a touch of magic and story telling, such as the Piste of the Wicked 
Fairy Godmother in Courchevel Moriond, and the Indians Piste, where children go 
in search of the Grey Wolf and the Chief of the Indian tribe.

When they find him he gets them doing archery and dressing up. And the family 
park underneath the Verdons gondola back has miniature kickers, rails, rollers 
and a skier cross track. What's more, children under five ski for free all over 
the mountain.

But for me, all the magic comes on the last day, when my instructor leads me 
down a run called Turcs. I'm chanting "forward, big toe, shoulder" (which makes 
a change from head, shoulders, knees and toes) and my skis are turning on their 
own accord. At the bottom we stop. "That was a black," he says, grinning. "I 
think you'll be ahead of the kids – for a few years at least."

• The trip was provided by FlexiSki <http://www.flexiski.com/> (020-8939 0862, 
) which has three nights at Hotel Saint Louis from £420pp half-board. 
Under-twos stay free, and children two-11 pay 70% with two full-paying adults. 
Lessons were provided byNew Generation <http://www.skinewgen.com/> (0844 770 
4733, ) in Courchevel 1850 and Courchevel 1650. The company also works in La 
Tania, Méribel, Serre Chevalier, Tignes, Val d'Isère, Vallandry and Verbier. Le 
Village des Enfants ESF 1850 <http://www.esfcourchevel.com/> (+33 4 7908 0847,) 
is a ski area and school for children.Boutik Services 
<http://www.boutikservices.com/en/> (+33 6 0958 0988) in 1850 has cots, booster 
seats, changing tables, buggies and child skis for hire. For a list of family 
restaurants seecourchevel.com <http://www.courchevel.com/>
