 Yan Pascal Tortelier, 50, was born in France, the son of a cellist. He studied 
piano and violin from the age of four, and, at 14, won first prize for violin 
at the Paris Conservatoire. He later gave up the violin to become a conductor. 
Since 1992, he has been principal conductor of the BBC Philharmonic. He lives 
in London.
 What is your idea of perfect happiness? A combination of music, family and 
nature.

 What is your greatest fear?
Coming on stage naked (only in bad dreams).

 Which living person do you most admire?
 Nelson Mandela.

 What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?
 Lack of self control.

 What is the trait you most deplore in others?
 Indifference.

 What has been your most embarrassing moment?
 Telling the brass section of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic to 'come in my 
face'.

 What is your greatest extravagance?
 Bungee-jumping backwards.

 What objects do you always carry with you? 
Baton and toothbrush.

 What vehicle do you own?
 The best, music.

 What is your favourite smell?
 Sylvie (my wife).

 What is your favourite word?
 Beauty.

 What is your favourite book? 
Beecham Stories.

 Which living person do you most despise?
 The taxman.

 Should the royal family be scrapped?
 Don't ask a French Republican . . . but really, you wouldn't be the same 
without it.

 Do you believe in monogamy? 
Yes, and I hope my wife does, too.

 What is your greatest regret? 
That my father never heard my orchestration of the Ravel Trio.

 How do you relax?
 Having a good laugh with my boys.

 How often do you have sex?
 I can't tell - I have memory lapses.

 What single thing would improve the quality of your life?
 Free Hedex Extra.

 What would your motto be?
 Always try.

 What keeps you awake at night?
 Hedex.

 How would you like to die?
 While conducting.

 Do you believe in life after death? No, as my sister once said, 'Death is 
when you fall asleep for life.'

How would you like to be remembered? 
As the most English of the French and the most French of the English.

 What is the most important lesson life has taught you?
 The world is paradoxical and the challenge is to find the thin line between 
what you think is right and wrong.
