
If I could pick just one flavour to capture the essence of the British summer 
it would have to be elderflower cordial: an instant flashback to fresh-cut 
lawns, the sun on your face and lazy days in the park, drink in hand. To me the 
simple annual ritual of making it – gathering bags of fragrant flowerheads, 
tumbling them into a giant saucepan, waiting for the magic to happen – is my 
sign that summer has truly arrived.

Yet after years of concocting the stuff from foraged flowers, I decided to 
have a little experiment. Science has demonstrated that in flowers such as 
roses, the unique combination of aroma compounds can create a massive diversity 
of scents, both in terms of intensity and character. So why shouldn’t this be 
the case with the handful of cultivated elderflower varieties? Could there be 
an elder out there with a much stronger scent? Perhaps one with more of the 
fragrant, lychee-like notes that I love? Maybe even a hint of colour?

After trialling seven varieties last year, I found Elder ‘Black Beauty’, which 
fulfils all my requirements and is in my opinion by far the best cultivar when 
it comes to making cordial, syrups, pies and jellies.

At this time of year the first thing you notice about ‘Black Beauty’ is its 
vibrant pink blossom, which can be up to 50% larger than some of the regular 
hedgerow species, giving the whole plant a frothy, “champagne cocktail” 
appearance. This colour is created by a group of chemicals calledanthocyanins 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1082903/>, which are believed to 
give fruit such as black grapes and blueberries their reported health benefits.

These compounds are also responsible for dyeing much of the plant an 
eyecatching shade of dark purple, from the leaves and flowers to the fresh 
shoots. The same water-soluble substance will also colour your cordial a dusky 
pink to deep fuchsia, depending on how many flowers you use.

But ‘Black Beauty’ has lots more to offer than just the novelty of colour. It 
has knock-out flavour, being both more intense overall than regular elder, but 
with a particularly pronounced muscat grape-meets-lychee hint.

Also sold under the synonym ‘Gerda’, this variety performs as well in the 
garden as it does in the kitchen. Tolerating a wide variety of soil types and 
situations, it can be grown across the country, but will produce the strong 
fragrance in sites with full sun and well-drained soil.

Its flash of colour makes it more aesthetically interesting than the species 
type but, unlike many other ornamental cultivars, it still produces excellent 
crops of both flowers and fruit. To me it’s elder, only better.

Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk <mailto:james.wong@observer.co.uk> or 
follow him on Twitter@Botanygeek <mailto:@Botanygeek>
