
The murder convictions of two brothers and their friend for their alleged role 
in a “joint enterprise” stabbing on the forecourt of an Essex garage are 
unsafe, the court of appeal has been told.

In the first of a series of challenges against the now discredited 
interpretation of the complex common purpose law 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/21/appeal-court-to-hear-first-guilty-by-association-test-cases>
, lawyers for Lewis and Asher Johnson said neither had participated in or 
encouraged the final, fatal stage of the attack. Nor did they have prior 
knowledge that their co-accused was going to use a knife, they said.

The fate of hundreds of youths imprisoned under joint enterprise rules could 
be affected by the criminal court of appeal’s examination of test challenges 
over the so-called foresight rule.

The hopes of those who believe they are victims of a miscarriage of justice 
were boosted by an extraordinarysupreme court victory in February 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/18/joint-enterprise-law-wrongly-interpreted-for-30-years-court-rules>
, which declared that judges had been misinterpreting the law for 30 years.

Foresight of what someone else might do is merely part of the evidence, the 
supreme court said. “It is for the jury to decide on the whole evidence … 
whether [a secondary party] had the necessary intent.”

Whether that ruling translates into the release of large numbers of inmates 
may become clear as a succession of hearings starts this week. The panel of 
judges – Lord Justice Leveson, Lady Justice Hallett and the lord chief justice, 
Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd – is examining individual cases affected by the 
so-called foresight rule.

Related: Appeal court to hear first 'guilty by association' test cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/21/appeal-court-to-hear-first-guilty-by-association-test-cases>

The court is focusing on the facts of each individual case and assessing 
whether defendants should have been convicted on the previous lower evidential 
threshold.

The case involving Lewis and Asher Johnson and Reece Garwood, who were all 
convicted of murdering Thomas Cudjoe in Ilford in November 2012, was the first 
before the court.

Oliver Blunt QC, for Lewis Johnson, said the judge had directed the trial jury 
four times on the foresight rule, which has since been discredited.

Lewis Johnson may have been involved in the first phase of the attack, Blunt 
explained, but that amounted to “no more than a kicking, punching and beating – 
a slap, if you like”. Johnson then walked away with his brother.

“There wasn’t any evidence of Lewis Johnson’s encouragement or participation 
in the [subsequent stabbing] events in the car [on the garage forecourt],” 
Blunt said.

“There was no clear evidence that he was aware of the knife [used by principal 
assailant Jerome Green] either at the outset or in the course of events.”

Green is not challenging his conviction at the hearing.

Sallie Bennett-Jenkins QC, for Asher Johnson, said there was no evidence of 
any common enterprise between her client and Green.

The extent of Asher Johnson’s involvement was that he punched, kicked and 
grappled, she said. “Green was not part of the initial assault. The brothers 
both stepped away from the vehicle, at some distance. There’s no common purpose 
between the Johnsons and Green.”

Sarah Forshaw QC, representing Garwood, said that although he had been 
“engaged in an unlawful assault on Cudjoe, what he did not have was an intent 
that Green would come in with murderous intent”.

Duncan Atkinson QC, for the crown, however, said the killing had been an 
agreed revenge attack on Cudjoe, who had been blamed for injuring one of their 
friends.

“It’s clear from the way the jury were directed that they had concluded that 
they were sure that each of the defendants knew that Green was in possession of 
a knife at that time,” he said. “This was a common purpose in which each was 
playing his part. The Johnson brothers had not withdrawn from that common 
purpose.”

The grassroots organisation Joint Enterprise: Not Guilty By Association 
<http://www.jointenterprise.co/> has led the campaign to overturn convictions. 
Supporters and relatives of those imprisoned packed the court of appeal on 
Tuesday.

The law of joint enterprise – also known as “common purpose”, where someone 
acts in conjunction with the killer but does not strike the blow that causes 
death – dates back to at least the 16th century. It was later developed to 
deter duelling by making seconds and doctors liable for murder.

The hearing continues.
