
Some crucial GCSE and A-level exams will be rescheduled over the next three 
years to avoid clashing with the height of theRamadan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ramadan> holy month, when observant Muslim 
pupils would be expected to fast.

While many exams will still take place during Ramadan, which this year is 
expected to start in early June, examination boards say they have held talks 
with Muslim groups and aim to avoid holding exams in the most popular subjects 
during the period.

“Where possible, large-entry GCSE and GCE [A-level] subjects are timetabled 
prior to the commencement of Ramadan and consideration is given to whether they 
are timetabled in the morning or afternoon,” said the Joint Council for 
Qualifications (JCQ), which represents examination boards in England, Wales and 
Northern Ireland.

Ramadan – when the Qur’an, the holy book of Islam, is believed to have been 
revealed to the prophet Muhammad – is commemorated by Muslims with fasting 
during the hours of daylight. Headteachers fear that Muslim pupils could suffer 
as a result during the stress of sitting exams.


As Ramadan is set by a lunar calendar, its date changes by 11 days every year. 
In 2016 the holy month is scheduled to run from 7 June to 5 July, overlapping 
with the traditional summer exam season in May and June.

Related: Ramadan: a guide to the Islamic holy month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/17/ramadan-guide-to-islamic-holy-month-muslims-fast>

Ramadan will continue to fall during peak periods in the exam season for the 
next two years as well, being forecast to begin on 27 May in 2017 and 16 May in 
2018.


The exam boards say they can schedule big examinations – such as GCSE English 
and maths – before Ramadan begins or after it ends. But exams in many subjects 
will still take place during the holy month.


“The small window in which examinations can be taken, the large number of 
candidates taking examinations and the diverse range of subjects available to 
candidates places significant limitations on the changes that can be 
accommodated for any one group. However, JCQ meets the needs of various groups 
as far as possible,” it said.

“JCQ and the qualifications regulator Ofqual have previously met with Muslim 
groups to discuss the timetabling of examinations in light of Ramadan moving 
into the examination period.”

The Department for Education said timetabling was a matter for the JCQ and its 
member exam boards to decide.

Anne Longfield, the government’s children’s commissioner for England 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-childrens-commissioner-appointed>, said 
she applauded the move.

“It’s really important this takes place and important we understand the 
individual children in this,” Longfield told parliament’s education committee 
at a hearing on Wednesday.

 “Clearly, there needs to be rigour around the examinations themselves, but I 
welcome the discussion,” she said.

The Association of School and College Leaders, which represents most state 
secondary school heads in England and Wales, said it had also been meeting with 
Muslim groups to gauge the impact of Ramadan falling within the exam season.

“School and college leaders are very keen to work with communities to ensure 
young people are able to observe Ramadan without any detrimental impact on 
their examinations,” Malcolm Trobe, ASCL’s deputy general secretary, said.

ASCL said it also plans to issue guidance to its members ahead of this year’s 
exams.

“The guidance will be non-prescriptive and will not advise families or 
students on how they should address the question of fasting during Ramadan, 
which we agree is a matter for the individuals concerned, along with parents, 
carers and faith leaders,” Trobe said.
