
What are we to make of this story about skinny jeans being bad for 
one’s health?

Name withheld, by email

If you’re a news editor then the thing to say is “Oh happy day, for bringing 
me such a blessed news story!” Certain things always warm a news editor’s 
heart. The summer, bringing with it the arrival of Glastonbury, A-level results 
and the Notting Hill carnival, allowing newspapers up and down the land to run 
photos of – as Private Eye would say – young fruity women looking fruity. 
Stories about Really Serious Issues in which photogenic women are involved 
(Angelina Jolie talking about violence against women, Amal Clooney talking 
about anything.) And finally, news stories that can be illustrated, however 
tangentially, by celebrities. Rarely has there been a story that better 
illustrates this principle than the one about the alleged dangers of skinny 
jeans.

The story, for those who missed it last week, is this: a 35-year-old woman in 
Australia recently suffered some damaged nerves in her legs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/22/skinny-jeans-bad-for-your-health-scientific-evidence>
. Some of you might be wondering why the tale of a random woman having a bit of 
leg trouble on the other side of the planetwould make headlines in Britain and 
the US 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2015/06June/Pages/A-case-report-about-skinny-jeans-sparks-media-frenzy.aspx>
. Well, she was wearing skinny jeans at the time and, while the jeans did not 
cause the problem (this was probably due to squatting while helping a friend 
move house), they possibly exacerbated it. Already we can see a great story 
cooking here, can we not? First, it allows us all, once again, to make fun of 
silly women and their silly clothes, a point emphasised by the name ofthe 
report on this case in the Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 
<http://jnnp.bmj.com/content/early/2015/06/26/jnnp-2015-310628> – Fashion 
victim: rhabdomyolysis and bilateral peroneal and tibial neuropathies as a 
result of squatting in “skinny jeans”. Catchy! And like I said, little ladies 
and their clothes, eh? Tchuh! The trouble those girls get into with their 
narcissistic ways.

But the main thing here is the skinny jeans factor. Skinny jeans, you see, are 
not just worn by 35-year-old Australians who help their friends move home. They 
are also worn by celebrities. So while Kate Moss and Russell Brand might not 
have actually experienced nerve damage themselves from their jeans – although 
that might explain some of their most recent displays of behaviour, from her 
chucking tantrums on EasyJet flights to him believing he affected the outcome 
of the British election – they can, at the very least, be used to illustrate an 
article about them. Et voilà, global coverage of the story about a woman in 
Australia who suffered from a dicky leg.

Nothing new about newspapers using spurious celebrity hooks, right? Why, only 
last week there wasa story about how there has been a rise in eating disorders 
among young people due to their exposure to “celebrity bodies”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/25/eating-disorders-rise-children-blamed-celebrity-bodies-advertising>
 Oh my God, it’s official! Celebrities literally cause mental illness! 
According to, er, one paediatrician. If you read a little further into the 
story (although, really, who has time to read beyond the headlines,amirite?) 
you’d encounter views from many other experts, including the brilliant 
Professor Janet Treasure (who, full disclosure, was formerly my doctor and is a 
goddess among mere mortals), saying that, actually, it is likely other factors 
are playing a part. Factors such as greater public awareness and, crucially, 
sufferers having to wait longer to get the treatment they need. But none of 
those have anything to do with celebrities.

The desperate need for a celebrity factor in a news piece can often obscure 
what the actual story is. To reiterate, skinny jeans did not cause this poor 
woman’s trouble – rather, it was squatting, while helping a friend move house. 
So the real story here, it seems to me, is that no one should ever help a 
friend to move house. This is not only a terrible health hazard, as the 
Australian woman has proven, but a guaranteed way to destroy a friendship. When 
I moved in with a chap once, he made me carry a sofa first down a flight of 
stairs and then up another in the belief that hiring moving men was a show of 
profligacy and hedonism on a par with buying a solid gold sofa and then lying 
on it every day, whiling away the hours by smoking opium. I consider it a 
testament to my Mother Teresa-like nature that we are still on speaking terms.

The other important issue not being discussed here is that skinny jeans are 
stupid. Not because they cause nerve damage – and to be honest, nothing about 
that story makes sense to me; as anyone who’s been near a pair of skinny jeans 
recently knows, they are now composed of so much Lycra that they’re basically 
leggings with a trompe l’oeil denim effect. No, what I mean is that skinny 
jeans are stupid because they look stupid. Along with Ugg boots and stupid 
phone “accessories”, they will be a key fashion piece in movies made in 20 
years time making fun of life in the early 21st century. Men, I implore you in 
particular: I appreciate that sun’s out, guns out, but please do not 
accessorise said guns with skinny jeans. Just seeing a man in skinny jeans in 
the heat makes me weep at the thought of what pharmacies call his “personal 
hygiene”.

So, too long, didn’t read? Short version: are skinny jeans a health risk? 
Probably not. Are skinny jeans ugly and smelly? Yes, for sure. This column: 
always here to help!

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
