
We were together since I finished university and were living in south London 
for five years. Our friends lived nearby and mostly it was an easy, happy, fun 
life. Like many couples we had comfortable routines of falling asleep together 
on the sofa and pottering around markets, pubs and parks at the weekend. We 
looked after each other and our days together were intimate and relaxed.

I adored the familiarity of our lives; hearing you get home from work and 
feeling you cuddle up to my back as I cooked dinner. I didn’t know at the time 
but I think it all left you feeling unfulfilled.

After months of discussion and spreadsheets calculating what we could afford, 
we had an offer on a small but perfect flat with exposed brick walls and a 
skylight in the bedroom. It was scary but exciting and it felt right.

Then you left me. It was a Saturday morning. I had just taken a call from the 
estate agent while you dozed next to me in bed. I woke you and dressed in a new 
pair of trousers (which I have not been able to wear since), and we popped out 
on our bikes. On the way back, we stopped for coffee and I realised that 
something was wrong. You were sad. I reacted to your mood angrily and made us 
go home. That’s when you told me you couldn’t “do this any more”.

My world fell apart. I couldn’t make sense of what was happening and it all 
happened so quickly. You went to your brother’s, then your mother’s. We talked 
and cried and talked and cried some more and when I realised there was nowhere 
else to go with the conversations or the tears, I found somewhere else to live.

My life has changed in so many ways. I met new friends. I skied for the first 
time in six years (you never wanted to go skiing with me). I stopped eating 
meat every dinner time. I learned how to fix punctures on my bike by myself. I 
took control of my finances. And, most surprisingly and happily, I started to 
cherish the love and light in others around me more, including my family, who 
have supported me so much.

My world has become richer but I want you to know that one year on, I still 
grieve and it still hurts more than I could have imagined. I wish you had been 
able to talk to me about how you were feeling. I wish you had been able to 
prepare me in some way for what was about to happen – that we weren’t going to 
wake up in that bedroom with the skylight, weren’t going to have the family I 
dreamed of having with you and weren’t going to watch the sun rise over the 
beach in Sri Lanka in February as we had planned.

I look back now with more clarity. You were restless. You weren’t ready to 
settle down and you didn’t know how to tell me.

A year has passed and I heard a few months ago from our friends that you are 
seeing someone else. While I cannot wish you luck as yet, I hope for both of 
your sakes you have learned to talk to her honestly and openly.

Anonymous
