
I have been sleeping with a work colleague for just less than a year. 
Officially, we are in a “casual relationship”, but I would like more. I defined 
the relationship as casual because I felt that if pressurised to be in a “real” 
relationship, he would run a million miles. He has had his heart broken in the 
past, suffers from anxiety and sometimes depression, and if I push too much, I 
can feel him pulling away. I have tried multiple times to break away from him – 
I never message him first, I don’t go out of my way to see him, I don’t ask him 
to come over – but he always ends up contacting me and re-sparking everything. 
I have never told him how I feel so I don’t think he knows the emotional 
turmoil I have been going through – I think he sees me as quite happy-go-lucky 
about things. The truth is that the relationship makes me feel empty, lonely 
and confused. I don’t feel as if I can tell him how I feel, and I don’t know if 
I should break it off or carry on. One part of me wants to be strong and leave 
him, but the other feels as if I haven’t given it enough of a chance (and I 
don’t want to scare him away). I have tried seeing other men, but they’re just 
not the same.

• When leaving a message on this page, please be sensitive to the fact that 
you are responding to a real person in the grip of a real-life dilemma, who 
wrote to Private Lives asking for help, and may well view your comments here. 
Please consider especially how your words or the tone of your message could be 
perceived by someone in this situation, and be aware that comments that appear 
to be disruptive or disrespectful to the individual concerned will be removed.

• If you would like fellow readers to respond to a dilemma of yours, send us 
an outline of the situation of about 150 words. For advice from Pamela 
Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your 
concerns.

• All correspondence should reach us by Wednesday morning. Email:
private.lives@theguardian.com <mailto://private.lives@theguardian.com> (please 
don’t send attachments).
