
When I started life as a palliative care social worker just over 26 years ago 
(although the term “palliative care” hadn’t been invented then) I was based in 
a multi-professional team that supported people with terminal cancer and their 
families in the community. I was employed by the north London borough in which 
we worked. The first day I arrived at work the team administrator said to me: 
“This is a good borough to work in; you can get anything you need for patients 
here.” Well she was right (within reason) but oh how times have changed.


My last few years of working life in a hospice in a different London borough 
have involved endless tussles with the Department for Work and Pensions, 
including fighting numerous appeal tribunals to help sick and disabled people 
get the benefits they are entitled to; with housing offices trying to help 
those living in completely unsuitable homes or who are effectively homeless get 
rehoused; with housing associations who resolutely ignore the needs of their 
tenants, however ill they may be and however serious the repairs are that need 
doing; trying to access desperately needed help for those with serious mental 
health issues and so on. It feels that the main purpose of statutory services 
is to prove at all cost that they do not need to help you.

Related: Soggy sofas aside, social work is an amazing job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/06/despite-reducing-resources-and-competing-demands-social-work-is-an-amazing-job>

The hospice was always aware that if a patient was well enough to be 
discharged from the day centre, for example, there would be no other similar 
service available in the community. Day centres for older people, those with 
learning difficulties or mental health needs have all but disappeared. The 
emphasis is now on how we should all be working whatever our age or situation 
and even those who are terminally ill are not immune from feeling that they are 
“benefit scroungers”.

But despite all these difficulties, some things have not changed at all. Those 
facing life limiting and life threatening illnesses continue to receive almost 
endless support from their families who so often rise to the challenge whatever 
the pressures that puts them under.

It is a myth that modern families do not care for each other. They do, and 
very often it is at the expense of their own health and income. Giving up work 
to care for a relative or a partner and perhaps claiming carer’s allowance, as 
I have seen so many people do, is usually a fatal career move. Unless you have 
a job or a skill that will guarantee employment once your family member dies, 
you will generally find that caring counts for nothing on a CV and eight weeks 
after a death carer’s allowance stops and it’s on to job seekers allowance for 
you with all the humiliations that that involves as you try to prove you are 
looking for work.

I often joked to patients and colleagues alike that “your employer doesn’t 
visit you when you are in the hospice”. They don’t, but your family does. It’s 
a good reminder to keep a healthy work/life balance.

This is not to underestimate the power of friendship either. Time and again I 
have been struck by the kindness and devotion of friends, especially for those 
who may not have a large, or any, family. I well remember one woman devotedly 
cared for by two friends whom she had met, aged 11, when they all started 
secondary school together some 70 years earlier. There are many, many people 
out there prepared to go the extra mile for someone close to them.

Related: What one woman, two cats and a surprise bedfellow taught me about 
social work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/mar/18/one-woman-two-cats-surprise-bedfellow-social-work>

So, for me, palliative care social work has been a wonderful field in which to 
work. It has involved working with a wide range of other professionals – 
including nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, doctors, 
dieticians and complementary therapists – each with their own insights. Most of 
all it has been an opportunity to work with a diverse group of patients and 
families.

Life threatening and life limiting illnesses are no respecter of class, 
income, age, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, religious belief, immigration 
status, mental health or learning difficulties. Palliative care social workers 
offer a wide range of support to patients and families from practical help and 
advice around income maintenance and debt counselling, help with housing and 
accessing other services through to advocacy, individual and family support and 
counselling and help for bereaved adults and children.

It has been an opportunity to practise social work as it is meant to be – 
empowering, enabling but not afraid to face and challenge conflicts and 
difficulties both within families and communities but in wider society. A far 
cry indeed from the care management model that most adult social work has now 
been reduced to.

Our new series 
<http://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/dec/21/social-care-stories-social-workers-occupational-therapists>
 aims to show what working in social care is really like. If you’d like to 
write for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
