
At first glance, the polystyrene container buried amid the beach detritus was 
unremarkable. Closer inspection however yielded something jarring about this 
discarded filet-o-fish box. Discovered by locals cleaning up in the wake of a 
storm last month on a South Australian beach, the polystyrene-based clamshell 
container bore a stylistically-dated design and logo, yet the packaging itself 
appeared as good as new.

It wasn’t new – McDonald’s stopped using such containers in 1991, so it had 
drifted in the Gulf St Vincent and beyond or lain buried within sand dunes for 
at least two-and-a-half decades.

By the life cycle standards of plastics however, this humble burger container 
was just beginning its journey; polystyrene foam remains intact for about 500 
years before breaking down into chemicals that linger far longer than that.

Historians typically define eras by the type of material civilisations leave 
behind: the stone age, the bronze age, the iron age. The archeologists of the 
future may well look back on the modern era as the plastic age, our legacy 
piling up in landfill, clogging up rivers, floating about the oceans, and 
choking or poisoning wildlife – and the humans who eat the wildlife – for 
centuries to come.

If University of Sydney Prof Thomas Maschmeyer has anything to do with it, the 
historians of tomorrow will have to, at a certain point, refer to a different 
material to chart human progress. That’s not because he has worked out a way to 
replace plastic, but rather a way to get rid of it.

Related: Australian biofuels could transform airline industry and create jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/21/australian-biofuels-could-transform-airline-industry-and-create-jobs>

Maschmeyer’s renewable energy startup Licella <http://www.licella.com.au/> is 
taking a more refined approach to the idea of waste incineration, pioneering a 
method to transform end-of-life plastics into a bio-crude petroleum substitute.

Renewable Chemical Technologies Ltd (RCTL), backed by UK energy investor 
ArmstrongEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, is investing 
A$10m (£5m) into Licella’s plan to build the world’s first commercial 
hydrothermal waste upgrading plant. Licella will develop and test a recycling 
plant in Australia before shipping it to the UK, with the first plant to be 
integrated into an existing facility, which Licella hopes will be the first of 
many.

The aim of the partnership is for RCTL to develop projects to convert 
end-of-life plastics into high-quality oil, suitable for blending into standard 
hydrocarbon fuels, using Licella’s proprietary catalytic hydrothermal reactor 
platform that has been developed in partnership with the University of Sydney.

Maschmeyer says the partnership will tackle the issue of what to do with 
end-of-life plastics – the remnants of mixed plastics with small amounts of 
paper and cardboard that are left over from more easily recyclable components.

“Dealing with end-of-life plastics is challenging and expensive, as they vary 
considerably and have traditionally had to be sorted in order to be recycled 
effectively,” he says.

Related: Australia's defence force could run on sugar cane and tyres under 
biofuel plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/06/australias-defence-force-could-run-on-sugar-cane-and-tyres-under-biofuel-plan>

“This investment will allow for the deployment of our technological solution 
on a commercial scale, with up to 20,000 tonnes to be transformed from waste to 
product annually from next year just from the first plant alone,” says Dr Len 
Humphreys, chair of Licella.

Virgin Australia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/21/australian-biofuels-could-transform-airline-industry-and-create-jobs>
 and Air New Zealand are interested in making use of such fuel, and the process 
can also turn waste products from the pulp and paper industry into bio-crude, a 
possibility that has attracted Canadian pulp and paper producer Canfor onboard 
to develop a full-scale commercial operation.

However, experts warn that bio-crudes are not without their own environmental 
consequences.

Dr Tom Beer, honorary fellow at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organisation (CSIRO) and former leader of the transport biofuels 
stream of the CSIRO energy transformed flagship, says turning plastics into 
bio-crude does present an environmental trade-off in respect to carbon 
emissions.

“Of the oil that gets extracted out of the ground, about a third is used to 
produce plastics, which effectively locks the carbon up into plastic,” he says.

“If you then turn it into bio-crude and burn it, that is no longer the case. 
It depends what you value most, do you want to get plastic out of landfill, and 
out of the oceans, then fantastic, but it does mean carbon emissions.”

Prof David Cohen, a specialist in the use of nuclear techniques to track fine 
particle air pollution at the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology 
Organisation, says carbon would not be the only thing emitted in the use of 
bio-crude.

“At the front end, production of a product like this is going to involve an 
energy component to convert it into fuel,” he says.

“Then at the back end, if you convert organic material into fuel and then burn 
it – then you are going to end up with a combination of carbon, hydrogen, 
oxygen and byproducts that could include soot, volatile organic carbons and 
carbon dioxide, which are all not so good for the atmosphere.

“Technologies like these are a step in the right direction, but in my opinion 
it’s renewable or low emission energies that will deliver the output you want – 
power – without what is essentially pollution displacement.”

“It’s like squeezing a long balloon. You squeeze the middle and the ends get 
bigger. You squeeze both ends and the middle gets bigger. You squeeze one end 
and the rest gets bigger.”

Maschmeyer says that in terms of processing, Licella has managed to 
dramatically reduce carbon emissions via a groundbreaking technique that 
involves extracting hydrogen from water, and has a much lower carbon footprint 
than typical crude oil processing.

“The crude oil refining process takes about 12% of the oil ending up as CO2 
before burning the oil, just in the process of taking it out of the ground,” he 
says.

“What we do is taking something already purified, and all we are doing is 
re-purifying.”

In terms of the end use of the bio-crude, he says that the economy is not 100% 
green just yet, and for as long as fossil fuels need to be used – such as in 
jet fuel – bio-crude is a more environmentally-friendly option given the 
comparatively lower carbon emissions and the added benefit of removing plastic 
from the environment.

“It is reusing, not renewable, but whilst [we’re still] using fossil fuels, 
reuse is certainly more attractive.”
