
You’re looking serious – am I late? An hour! Wow, sorry, remind me to buy a 
watch. That’s the only thing about going phone-free – yes, got rid, changed my 
life – so I won’t be checking it all lunchtime. Ha, I see you’ve already got 
yours on the table! I couldn’t borrow it for a second, for the cricket score? 
Isn’t that a record – actually, just let me check that… and can I just look at 
my email while I’m on? Wait, I should probably answer this one, and this.


OK, I’m all yours, where was I? Right, well, one day I just thought, how would 
it feel to live in the moment, totally phone‑free? Like my parents managed 
somehow, right? Been a revelation, haven’t looked back – I must have gained on 
average an hour a day just by not checking Twitter, and photographing 
everything. I mean, what is that all about? Who cares? And when you do need to 
photograph something, no problem, because everyone else has a phone. Like now 
I’d like to Insta my 100th phone-free day, so if you could pass me yours for a 
second… Ha ha, come on, smile – you see, being phone-free doesn’t mean I’m now 
this boring old hater. I just feel miles happier and more creative without one, 
like this incredibly strong feeling of my brain finally working properly, 
without any distractions? It’s about freedom, really.


What time is it? Bugger, can I borrow it back a second? Need to tell my next 
appointment I’m running late. Oh God, what’s her number – hang on, let me look 
up her office, they can text… I don’t believe this, she’s just gone phone-free! 
Well, page her already, you idiots!

Related: Modern tribes: the period drama fan 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/23/modern-tribes-period-drama-fan-catherine-bennett>

Close one. You know you’re down to 5% of charge? OK, better run, could you get 
me an Uber. I’ll pay you, wait, is that your phone? Weird ringtone! For me? Hi 
darling, anything wrong – ohChrist, it’s died – did you not charge it before 
you left? Well, isn’t that what your parents would have done, if they’d had 
mobile phones? What happens now? Do they even do pay phones any more?
