
A mother whose two sons were killed by their father after the family court 
granted him access to them is calling on the justice secretary, Michael Gove, 
to act urgently to prevent more children from being murdered by violent parents.


Claire Throssell spoke out after the conviction of Ben Butler on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/21/ben-butler-found-guilty-of-murdering-six-year-old-daughter-ellie>
 for the murder of his six-year-old daughter, Ellie, 11 months after a family 
court judge granted him custody of her.

 Throssell said no other child should suffer like her sons Jack, 12, and Paul, 
nine, and Ellie Butler, all murdered after judges in the family courts allowed 
their fathers contact despite evidence that the men were abusive and violent.

Butler’s violent past was known to the authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/21/ben-butler-violent-posed-doting-family-man>
 before he was granted custody of Ellie. He had a string of convictions 
including for robbery and several assaults on a girlfriend.

Related: Ben Butler, the violent criminal who posed as a doting father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/21/ben-butler-violent-posed-doting-family-man>

Throssell said the courts were ignoring legal guidelines and instead putting 
deeply embedded cultural beliefs that a father should have contact with his 
children over the need to put children’s best interests first.

According to the Women’s Aid Child First campaign 
<https://www.womensaid.org.uk/childfirst/>, in the decade to 2015, 19 children 
– including Throssell’s sons – were killed by fathers with histories of 
domestic abuse who had access to their children through informal or formal 
contact arrangements reached through the family courts.

“The Butler case is absolutely heartbreaking,” Throssell said. “I am speaking 
out for my children. Jack’s last words as he lay dying were: ‘My dad did this 
and he did it on purpose.’ That must never be allowed to happen again.

“No more children’s lives should be taken in anger and malice. That cannot be 
allowed to happen and there needs to be urgent action taken to make sure the 
courts follow the legal guidelines to put children’s safety first.”

Throssell’s sons were killed in October 2014 in a fire set by their father, 
David Sykes, at his home in Penistone, South Yorkshire. During divorce 
proceedings he had been granted access to his children for five hours a week, 
despite Throssell’s evidence that he had previously threatened to kill them and 
himself.

Her son Paul had described issues of abuse involving his father to a family 
adviser from the court service Cafcass, and Throssell had presented evidence of 
his controlling behaviour and violence.

Two days before he killed his children, Sykes barricaded the family adviser 
inside a room during an interview over his access, but he was still allowed to 
take the children to his home 48 hours later.

During that visit Sykes, 44, lured the boys up to the loft with the promise of 
chocolate bars and a newly purchased train set, then set a fire downstairs and 
closed the loft with him and his children inside.

Throssell said: “I warned the social worker and the Cafcass adviser never to 
see him on their own. He had been arrested several times for violence to a 
neighbour, he had been abusive to me, he had hit the children, I put all this 
in black and white in my court statement and I said that he had threatened to 
kill them before. Yet he was still given access.”

Throssell is at the forefront of the Child First campaign, which is calling 
for urgent action by Gove and the judiciary to force the family courts to abide 
by guidance that already exists to put the safety of children first.

The guidance, known as practice direction 2, states that where there is 
evidence of domestic abuse, whether violence or coercive control, the court 
must ensure that any child contact arrangement “protects the safety and 
wellbeing of the child and the parent with whom the child is living, and does 
not expose them to further risk of harm”.

Related: Ellie Butler judge 'took unwarranted steps' to reunite her with 
violent parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/22/ellie-butler-judge-took-unwarranted-steps-to-reunite-her-with-violent-parents>

Last month a serious case review of the murder of four-year-old Alexa-Marie 
Quinn by her father, Carl Wheatley, in 2013 found that she had been let down by 
the courts and social workers.

Wheatley, 31, beat his daughter to death less than three months after the 
family court in Luton, Bedfordshire granted him custody, despite concerns 
raised about his contact by the child’s foster carers.

Phil Picton, chairman of the safeguarding children board in Hertfordshire, 
concluded: “Alexa-Marie was a very vulnerable little girl who was placed into 
the care of a man who actively sought to win custody of her and then within 
weeks went on to murder her.

“During Alexa-Marie’s last days, Carl Wheatley deliberately misled 
professionals and resisted the efforts of those who were concerned for his 
daughter’s safety. He had many opportunities to seek medical attention for the 
injuries he had inflicted on her but made no effort to get the help that could 
have saved her life.”

Polly Neate, the chief executive of Women’s Aid, said the conviction of 
Butler, and the evidence of many other cases of child homicides by perpetrators 
of domestic violence, meant urgent action was needed.

“This terrible tragic case shows how the safety of children must be at the 
heart of all decisions made by the family courts,” said Neate. “This is 
routinely not happening. We need to see urgent changes made, as, demonstrated 
by our research, unsafe contact with violent parents puts children in grave 
danger – with fatal consequences.”
