
First dilemma My boyfriend says he is not sure what we are doing or if we’re 
even heading down the marriage route. We have been together for four years and 
he has hurt me a few times with arguments, things he says in anger and how he 
has acted towards me in the past. But I am scared of losing him and I do love 
him.

Second dilemma I’ve been with my boyfriend for one year. When it’s just the 
two of us we have a great time. He’s had no long-term relationships, but lots 
of one-night stands. We’ve had a few arguments because of his lack of 
commitment to the relationship. Whenever we go out I feel humiliated because he 
stares at other women until they make eye contact. He doesn’t flirt openly when 
I’m around, but he does talk about other women. I would dump him, but I love 
him.

Mariella replies Of course you both do! But how many mistakes we make using 
only the rationale of our hormonal responses. Thank you for putting love on the 
menu, and the myriad acts of self-harm we commit in its name. Picking a partner 
is the biggest choice we make in our life, but our selection is often based on 
animal instincts. Instincts which let us down more often than not. (See war, 
greed, envy, violence and sloth for further evidence.) The only instinct I 
trust is the one that tells you when something isn’t right. So separating the 
many strings that make up the knotted cord of passion is as challenging as it 
is invaluable.

What better time to do so than now, while the L-word is in the air? Our annual 
orgy of conspicuous romancing – where, wallet in hand, we declare our love via 
saccharine cards and balloon hearts, overpriced flowers and waist-thickening 
chocolates – is upon us. That inescapable, seductive, intelligence defeating, 
rationality obliterating emotional surge that says we’re in love is being 
celebrated across the land, and only a sour old crone like me would throw salt 
into the open wound that heartache makes.

When you’re in love you’re a victim – so the mythology goes – helpless to 
defend yourself against the onslaught of biological busyness. Good love is what 
you run home to – it’s the chest you bury your head in, the space where you 
summon the nerve to step back into the world; it makes you happy and whole, not 
insecure, lacking in self-worth and feeling that you need to try harder. 
Valentine’s Day is a lottery, and winning tickets are rare. For all the fully 
sated love addicts out there whose lovers live up to expectations, there are 
the many millions for whom the day is simply a reminder of what they haven’t 
got or highlights the flaws of the partner they “couldn’t help” falling in love 
with.

Good love makes you happy and whole, not insecure, lacking in self-worth and 
feeling that you need to try harder

When you get to midlife, like me, you get asked a lot about regrets and rarely 
about future ambitions. It happens so surreptitiously you barely notice the day 
it switches. I used to reply that regret was a wasted emotion, but nowadays 
what I regret is all the time I wasted trying to mould unlikely boyfriends into 
perfect partners.

What is it about the human condition that makes our pulse rate and pheromone 
levels rise in direct contrast to the level of attention we’re paid? For too 
many of us love is… making excuses for the perfectly functional, capable human 
beings who fail to be functional and capable around us. Why do we bother? It’s 
a squandering of emotional energy most common in youth, when we feel we have an 
excess of time for everything. Even with the clock on our side it’s a period 
when we should be gorging on freedom and fun instead of fretting about some 
will-o’-the-wisp who hasn’t called, has failed to show up or has spent the 
previous evening gazing at someone from afar or drooling over them.

Luckily you do grow out of such masochistic tendencies, but it’s hard not to 
regret the decades that flitted past where every scornful act, every insult to 
your intelligence, every crime against your confidence was embraced as a 
challenge rather than registered as a stop sign.

My favourite Valentine’s Day was 25 years ago, when I received an anonymous 
handwritten copy of the lyrics to “These Foolish Things”. That selfless act of 
devotion with no regard for a result may be the most romantic thing that will 
ever happen to me!

Luckily we live in an overpopulated world – what I realise now is that there 
was no need to get hung up on one single human being when there are billions to 
choose from. That’s not the message Cupid is firing off today, but it’s 
possibly the truest thing you’ll hear. When it comes to choosing a companion 
for life we should none of us be contenting ourselves with bare bones; in 
matters of the heart there really are plenty more fish in the sea.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
