
A company’s clothes collection bags have been banned for failing to make clear 
that it was a commercial business and that recipients were not donating 
directly to a charity.

The bags, distributed by Recycle Proline Ltd, were headlined “Cancer Research 
& Genetics UK” on both sides and also included a charity registration number.

Text on one side provided the collection details and said “Please help us to 
raise funds for Cancer Research & Genetics UK”.

On the other side the bags read “Fundraises to further our campaign to raise 
awareness of cancer and its genetics links in UK and Europe. Help us by 
donating ...” and listed the items the company would accept. Smaller text 
stated “Recycle Proline Ltd is a commercial company which collects second hand 
clothing and donate [sic] at least £3,200 per month to Cancer Research & 
Genetics UK from the proceeds of sale.”

One recipient complained to the Advertising Standards Authority 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/asa> that the bags were misleading because 
the company’s commercial status was not sufficiently clear given the prominence 
of the charity message.

Recycle Proline said it had changed the design of its bags following a 
previous complaint to the ASA, making it clear that it was a commercial company 
that donates a portion of its profits to charity.

However, the watchdog said there was no mention of Recycle Proline on the 
front of the bag and, overall, the charity’s name and registration number were 
more prominent than the company’s details.

The ASA said the bags should not appear again in their current form as they 
were “likely to give consumers the misleading impression that they were 
donating directly to the charity”.

Clothing collection bags have been an ongoing issue for the ASA. 

Aside from the previous complaint about Recycle Proline, the ASA has 
previously banned bags distributed by GT Recycling Ltd 
<https://www.asa.org.uk/Rulings/Adjudications/2013/6/GT-Recycling-Initiatives-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_223087.aspx#.VvpLcc61_9J>
, which featured the “Kids ‘n’ Cancer UK” logo and read “Recycle with us ... 
using the bag enclosed. Our authorised collector ...”

The watchdog ruled that GT Recycling’s bags were misleading because they did 
not make it clear that the company, rather than the charity, was responsible 
for the bags.

“We understood that GT Recycling Initiatives were responsible for 
co-ordinating the marketing material and paid Kids ‘n’ Cancer for the use of 
their name, logo and details,” the ASA said.

“Although they provided payment to the charity, GT Recycling Initiatives were 
mainly collecting for their own commercial purposes. Because the commercial 
purpose of the ad and the advertiser’s involvement was not made clear, we 
concluded that it was misleading.”
