
The BBC’s coverage of Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> 
is set to come under close scrutiny after its governing body found a “startling 
disparity” in the number of men’s and women’s games it featured last year, on 
one day devoting 93% of its airtime to the men’s tournament.

Fronted by Sue Barker and Clare Balding, its coverage of the first week of the 
All England LawnTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> championship 
across its three main TV channels last year was about three times more likely 
to feature men than women.

The trust rejected a viewer’s complaint that it showed “unacceptable levels of 
gender bias against the women’s game” but called on theBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> to “give a higher profile to women’s 
matches”.

Related: Eurosport gets green light for live Wimbledon coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jun/16/eurosport-live-wimbledon-coverage-bbc>

The complainant’s data suggested that 76% of the broadcaster’s TV coverage in 
the first week of last year’s Wimbledon focused on men’s matches, with the 
figure rising to 93% on the middle Saturday of the tournament.

The trust said “viewers had every right to expect the BBC would start from the 
basis of equality between male and female players”.

The complainant, who monitored at 15 minute intervals the matches shown on 
BBC1, BBC2 and the BBC’s red button service across the first week of last 
year’s tournament, said more than 75% of coverage was of men’s matches.

All but one of the men’s top 16 seeds were featured on one or more occasions, 
but only seven of the women’s top seeds were given airtime. Just under half of 
Serena Williams’s first two matches were shown despite her competing for a 
historic second grand slam.

“In a sport where the genders enjoy similar levels of popularity … the BBC’s 
commitment is very clearly to the men’s tournament,” the complainant said.

The trust said it was “surprising” that Williams’s matches were not covered in 
full, but in its judgment published on Thursday said there was “no evidence of 
a significant discrepancy that suggested bias against the women’s game” within 
the BBC.

On the day of the biggest discrepancy, the championships’ middle Saturday in 
which 93% of the BBC’s coverage featured men, the trust said there was 
“evidence of ... reasonable judgment which outweighed the suggestion of any 
bias against the women’s game”.

The figures are likely to be an embarrassment for the BBC which has pledged to 
“better reflect the diversity of the UK across our programmes and services” and 
make shows that “reflect modern Britain accurately and authentically”.

The BBC said its coverage across BBC1 and BBC2 last year devoted 70% of its 
time to men’s matches, and 30% to women.

It said its choice of which match to show was “based solely on editorial merit 
and not a quota-based system that seeks to equalise the amount of airtime 
afford to men’s and women’s tennis”.

Trustees said that “significantly more men’s matches were shown (in whole or 
in part)“ during the first half of last year’s tournament and “they found this 
disparity surprising”.


“Trustees … felt strongly that viewers had every right to expect the BBC would 
start from the basis of equality between male and female players,” said the 
judgment.

“Trustees would encourage BBC Sport to maintain momentum in highlighting the 
importance of women’s sport – in this case tennis.”

BBC executives said they would take figures into account when planning for its 
coverage of this year’s tournament, which begins on 27 June.

The trust said the amount of airtime given to men and women would be affected 
by the fact that men’s matches last longer than women’s, and by the scheduling 
of matches by the All England Lawn Tennis Club.

A BBC Sport spokeswoman said: “This complaint was not upheld and the trust 
concluded that there was no evidence of any editorial bias during our Wimbledon 
output.

“We cover both men’s and women’s tournaments extensively, and whilst we value 
all feedback from our audience all decisions around which games will be shown 
are based on editorial judgement.”
