
Tess Robson, who has died of cancer aged 63, was an inspirational teacher of 
young children. For more than 20 years she was head of the state nursery 
school, Tachbrook, rated “outstanding”, in the heart of the Peabody Estate in 
Pimlico, west London.

The eldest of four children, and raised by her mother, Margaret Hodgkinson, 
after her parents divorced she was educated at theUrsuline high school in 
Wimbledon <http://www.ursulinehigh.merton.sch.uk/>, south-west London, 
retaining strong friendships from her time there. Studying for a degree in 
medieval history at Manchester, she met the architect Dave Robson, and they 
married in 1976.

In the 70s she trained as a nursery teacher at Froebel College in Roehampton 
<http://www.roehampton.ac.uk/Colleges/Froebel-College/>. This was a choice of 
career which surprised no one who had ever seen the rapport Tess had with 
children of all ages. Telling stories and playing games, she drew on her love 
of myths and legends and her knowledge of the natural world as well as a 
sometimes anarchic sense of humour to communicate in an extraordinary way.

She moved to Pimlico for the last 10 years of her career, delighted to be part 
of a local community where she at times welcomed a second generation of the 
same family to the school. She delighted, too, in learning about the stories 
and traditions of the many cultures children brought to the nursery, creatively 
helping them adapt to their new lives in the safety of Tachbrook, where the 60 
children might speak as many as 28 different languages.

Among other achievements, she created a wonderful garden for the nursery where 
children, many from inner-city flats, had the opportunity to make fires and 
woodland camps, or grow and cook vegetables – and, most important of all, could 
play whatever the weather, occasionally turning a blind eye to health and 
safety regulations.

Friends tried to persuade Tess to take a higher profile in the world of early 
years education, but she never wanted a public role, although she was always 
happy to share her ideas and show the work in progress at Tachbrook.

She had just embarked on a busy retirement, looking after the two-year-old 
daughter of an unwell friend, taking singing lessons, learning Norwegian so 
that she could chat to her sister Veronica’s sons and grandsons in Oslo, 
volunteering as an usher at Cadogan Hall and at the educational charityRoots 
and Shoots <http://www.rootsandshoots.org.uk/>in Lambeth, south London, and 
planning more travels with her friends. Only 15 months into this happy time she 
learned she was terminally ill, a turn of events she bore with her usual 
pragmatism and humour.

Tess and Dave divorced in the 1980s. She is remembered with great love and 
affection by her many friends and by generations of children at Tachbrook.
