
• Unveiling his plans 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/lygo-lifts-lid-on-itv-masterplan/5104155.article?blocktitle=Most-popular&contentID=-1>
 for ITV after replacing Peter “Pinch ‘em” Fincham as director of television, 
ever-quotable Kevin Lygo made headlines by complaining that the BBC was too 
prone to fill its schedule with long runs of series such Casualty. “You could 
argue the BBC need not be quite so focused on that consistent delivery,” he 
said, “and could try new and interesting things with new and interesting 
people.” New and interesting people, perhaps, like gifted debut playwright Ruby 
Solomon, author of BBC1 pilot cop show Walter, which was revealed before 
transmission in 2014 to have been penned and submitted by Lygo using Ruby as 
his pen name. Nothing has been heard since of it getting a green light as a 
series, but no doubt that’s due to all that long-run landfill leaving scant 
scope for blazing emerging talent.

• Also fascinating was Lygo’s signal that he wanted documentaries about crime 
(“everyday hideousness”) but wasn’t content with the network’s current 
offerings in the genre. “What is the modern way of doing that for ITV?” he 
wondered. “Is it through Trevor McDonald or Piers Morgan?” – a question that 
would seem to presuppose the answer “no!” and spell curtains for the pampered 
pair’s crook-hunting trips to America. Next week, hopefully, he’ll similarly 
ask aloud: “what’s the modern way for us to do a chatshow – is it through 
Jonathan Ross?”

• The way online titans assert their supremacy over waning old media can take 
subtle forms, as evinced by Amazon’s party last week to mark the new 
availability of its Amazon Prime Music streaming service on Sonos. Guests 
throwing shapes at Sonos Studios in east London were informed that the floor 
there had come from the BBC Maida Vale studios across town – yes, they were 
literally trampling at Amazon’s invitation on part of theBBC 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, sacred territory where the Beatles 
played for the Beeb, hundreds of classical concerts were recorded, and John 
Peel gave bands such as Nirvana, Pulp and the Smiths early breaks in his Peel 
Sessions.

• Who knew that Jim Naughtie was ratings gold? As Press Gazette points out, the
latest Rajar figures 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/rajar-radio-laudience-round-radio-4s-today-loses-300000-listeners-following-departure-jim-naughtie>
 show that the Today programme had an average reach of 6.8 million listeners in 
post-Naughtie Q1 2016 compared with 7.1 million in Q1 2015 when he was still on 
board – a hefty year-on-year drop of 300,000 listeners. Possible takes on the 
Scot’s pulling power would be that listeners tuned in in the hope of catching 
his occasional gaffes and trademark multi-clause questions, or that the 
long-running Jim ’n’ John combo offered a comfortable familiarity that’s now 
gone with ever-shifting pairings, often involving recently arrived presenters; 
another might be that with Naughtie departed all the breakfast hosts except 
John Humphrys are English.

• “Success has many parents, but failure is an orphan” is the TV industry’s 
truest saying, and the latest Radio Times’ letters column entertainingly sees 
the continuation of a paternity dispute going back to the Swinging Sixties. 
“Without wishing to rain on my friend Sir David Attenborough’s parade in 
[BBC1’s] Attenborough At 90,” chunters former BBC1 controller Paul Fox, who is 
also 90, “Monty Python’s Flying Circus did not begin on BBC2 [of which 
Attenborough was controller]. It began … on BBC1. In 1969. I commissioned it.” 
In a response in italics, the magazine concedes it debuted on BBC1, but says 
Attenborough was by then director of programmes and so “involved in the show’s 
conception”. Let’s hope both nonagenarians will still be around in three years’ 
time when the 50th anniversary will give them a chance to properly sort out who 
the father was.

• Although the appointment 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/18/itv-news-in-talks-with-noreena-hertz-over-economics-editor-role>
 as economics editor (an “explainer” job often filled by non-journalists) of 
the academic Noreena Hertz has come under fire in the rightwing press, having 
read her book of tips on decision-making Monkey can see nothing but advantages 
for her new ITV colleagues. They too can now benefit from advice on how to 
prepare for making big calls and deals previously available to Hertz’s husband 
Danny Cohen, which at the time of Eyes Wide Open’s publication Monkey noted 
include: sport noise-reducing headphones; use a meditation app to gauge your 
feelings; always wear the same clothes and eat the same meals; ensure you’re 
neither sex- nor sleep-starved; and only take decisions on a full stomach and 
bladder. The last tip does mean of course that serial decision-makers will have 
to drink water constantly, while avoiding running to the loo until a decision 
has been made or the pain of holding themselves in check (without betraying 
their peak bladder condition to meeting-mates) becomes too much to bear.



• In devoting a four-page investigation to the ordeal of four students at 
Cirencester agricultural college - they were accused of rape but cleared at 
trial when the Crown’s case collapsed - the Mail on Sunday chiefly had the 
detective who headed the botched investigation in its sights. But its giant 
sub-headline seemed to spread the blame more widely (“Accused of gang rape at a 
top royal college. Publicly shamed. Then exonerated only after shocking police 
abuses … ”), implicitly condemning those who “publicly shamed” the innocent 
students before and during the trial – as illustrated by a “rag-out” from one 
newspaper (with photos of them arriving at court above a headline saying “four 
students … ‘raped woman at ball’”) to show “how the case was reported”. But 
which paper was being publicly shamed, albeit unnamed, for this public shaming? 
Few MoS readers will have failed to spot the typeface of its sister title, and 
an archive check confirms that the ragged-out report appeared on 30 March this 
year in the Daily Mail.
