
'Education is the key to success" smiles Standile Mazibuko. As the schoolgirl 
lifts her head from her economics homework, winter winds swirl round her 
village – a collection of Zulu huts in the hills of Isandlwana, once a 
battleground of the Anglo-Zulu wars. "Assess the causes of poverty in your 
local community" is the task set by her schoolteacher.

"Without [education] it's difficult to have a better life; I want to change my 
home and community's life, it's poor. Maybe I could bring in some money for my 
family," she says.

The post-apartheid education system has brought the South African government's 
National Curriculum to her very rural community. In classrooms across the 
overwhelmingly rural Umzinyathi district, in KwaZulu-Natal, students are 
studying accountancy, business management, mathematical literacy and English, 
while life orientation classes include HIV/Aids awareness and sexual health.

To deliver basic education for all, as outlined by the government in 1996, the 
education budget has reached 20% of national spending – R165bn (about £13bn) 
for the year 2010/11. Children in the poorest schools now receive one meal a 
day and no longer pay fees.

But rural schools don't enjoy the same facilities as their urban counterparts. 
The most dedicated high school students are barely passing their final year 
matric exams: the students need a grade of 60% or above to gain entry to 
university and be eligible for bursaries. Lack of development, HIV/Aids, 
teenage pregnancy and 85% unemployment face the people of Umzinyathi. In 
Standile's community alone there have been three murders recently.

UNAids (the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/Aids) statistics indicate 
that 39.1% of residents in KwaZulu-Natal live with HIV/Aids – figures for 
Umzinyathi are hazy. "Most have it but don't get tested," reveals Poppy, a 
counsellor in a local health centre. Her job is made more difficult by the 
stigma, fear and denial that causes many Zulu people to seek 
traditional healers.

Orphaned generation

But the orphaned generation is evident. "I can say 70% [of the pupils] are 
Aids orphans," says Tiny Ngubo, principal of Nhloya school. Carers and parents 
who are around are mostly illiterate and, with little experience of education 
themselves, find its benefits are harder to see.

The Department of Education (DoE) is encouraging government departments to 
work with schools to address HIV/Aids. In discussions with parent-led student 
governing bodies and the Tribal Council, the DoE is proposing that condoms 
should be provided free of charge in schools.

"It's something shocking (for) us … it's like you're promoting sex at 
schools," explains Xolani Mkhize, a member of the school's governing body. He 
offers a glimpse of the challenges that arise when education attempts to 
address what are considered community matters.

With programmes in place to tackle the challenges in rural areas, ward manager 
Mr Vilkazi, provides a point of contact between the department and the schools. 
From behind a mound of paperwork, he explains government policy on teenage 
pregnancy concerning grade 12 students, aged between 16 and 18, who deliver 
their babies during the examination period: "We bring the papers to the 
hospital and we supervise," he says.

Other efforts include increased assessment – and not leaving classrooms 
unsupervised while teachers attend workshops on monitoring and evaluation. 
Subject advisers support numerous under-qualified teachers and adult education 
classes are held after school for illiterate parents.

More recently, unable to ignore the detrimental consequences of a generation 
orphaned by HIV/Aids, government programmes have focused on inclusive 
education. In 2001 the DoE set out to equip one in 25 schools with counselling 
services, special needs provisions and health services for the community and 
school alike. Yet the complete neglect of infrastructure in Umzinyathi means 
the DoE efforts struggle to deliver lasting change.

At Engudumeni primary school the principal, Mrs Angel, has become reliant on a 
local farmer who supplies the school with water, transport and, most recently, 
a kitchen. Her school remains multi-grade with two classes being taught 
simultaneously in one room.

In the place of rural business initiatives a culture of dependency resides, 
unbroken from the days of apartheid. Subsistence farming and child social 
grants of R250 a month are used to support families – which can encourage 
teenage pregnancy. In an effort to initiate employment, government colleges are 
sprouting up sporadically; offering skills-based training and cheaper fees than 
universities. But information isn't reaching rural schools and gaining the 
support of a community, in which education doesn't produce financial results, 
is the task of principals such as Mrs Shabangu: "We have to tell [the 
community] that one day, it will change … maybe in 2020 there will be a great 
difference in South Africa: the rate of employment, maybe it will improve," she 
says.

For Standile, who aspires to be a social worker, and other children like her, 
time is precious.

"The link is the absence of the parents", says Thami Gumbi of South African 
not-for-profit organisation MIET Africa, which, together with the David Rattray 
Foundation (DRF), has launched the Siyanakekela Project. The project focuses on 
15 schools working with community members on integrating school activities more 
into the community, as well as HIV awareness, illiteracy and sustaining the 
schools. Learning-support assistants make home visits to the most vulnerable 
children and partnerships are opened up – encouraging the Departments of 
Health, Education and Social Development to work in communities.

"We realise that the community is not educated [about] what services are 
available," adds Gumbi. Supported by the project, Cebelihle primary is now a 
health-promoting school, hosting a mobile clinic for all members of the 
community.

Determined but under-qualified teachers are receiving training alongside their 
principals, student governing body members and even departmental officials, in 
school management, computer skills and curriculum development. "The level of 
knowledge of teachers exposed to the DRF programme surpasses in some cases that 
of the subject advisers," admits Mr Majola, district head of education. Having 
built no school structures this year, Majola relies heavily on the DRF to build 
classrooms, toilets and libraries in schools that receive its support.

Having undertaken a course, life orientation teacher Baqondile Dlamini now has 
the skills to pass on knowledge of environmentalism, climate change and energy 
efficiency to her students, who in turn teach their communities. It is through 
partnerships that NGO efforts are reaching beyond existing government 
initiatives.

"They told us what to do when you are raped," Nqobile Mngadi whispers. Having 
attended a Peace Corps-led girls' camp, she and her peers understand that 
sexual harassment shouldn't be the norm, and feel more equipped to fight off 
unwanted advances. Although many of their parents are absent or unemployed, the 
girls hope to break this cycle, dreaming of becoming engineers or doctors – and 
as for marriage, it's "not for 10-15 years", says one.

Avoiding unemployment, teenage pregnancy or migration is the challenge for 
this new, educated generation; though without rural employment opportunities to 
match this ambition, it will not be easy.

But the challenge is being accepted: "I don't want to fail to try, I'd rather 
try and fail," is Standile's view, as she returns to her homework.
