
Closing time approaches, waiting staff collect plates littered with leftovers 
and chefs sweep up spoiled ingredients. This routine, repeated in restaurants 
across the developed world, means $80bn (£56bn) of food is wasted annually.

London-based startup Winnow is tackling the problem with its smart meter for 
food waste. Since opening in 2013, the business has saved its customers £2m and 
reduced carbon emissions from the hospitality sector by 3,400 tonnes.

Co-founder Marc Zornes, who researched food waste while working at business 
consultants McKinsey, says research into energy efficiency in buildings and 
cars attracts lots of money but there’s “hardly any investment into dealing 
with the issue of food waste”.

The Winnow system has a simple touch screen connected to waste bins that weigh 
each item. Staff log everything they throw away – where it comes from (eg 
peelings or leftovers), the food type (eg vegetable), and the specific product 
(eg onion).

Related: Doggy bags to pig feed: 10 things we learned about food waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/15/pig-feed-to-doggy-bags-10-things-we-learned-about-food-waste>

Thus kitchens can track where most waste is produced and make changes to 
reduce this. A restaurant might reduce portions of frequently leftover dishes, 
or a staff canteen might make smaller batches of often unfinished meals.

For the first 12 months, Winnow was self-funded, with its co-founders (Zornes 
and Kevin Duffy) sacrificing their salaries from their day jobs. In that time, 
Winnow proved its tech could facilitate substantial savings.

Recently collected anonymised data shows that waste can easily occur in food 
production and that Winnow users can record a 25% reduction in waste in the 
first month of use and 50%. The company says restaurants can ultimately cut 
waste by 50% using its tech.

The business’s profile has grown in the past 12 months and a seed funding 
round closed with £600,000 last May. Swiftly following this was a series A 
round, which closed in January and, in all, will have raised £2.5m.

Winnow is the 2016 winner of the startup of the year category of the Guardian 
Sustainable Business Awards 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/guardian-sustainable-business-awards-2016-the-categories-and-awards-criteria>
.

 * This piece was amended on 27 May 2016 to clarify that carbon emissions were 
reduced by 3,400 tonnes (not 34,000 tonnes) and that users can cut food waste 
by 50% overall. 