
Adobe: ‘Wager’ (starts at 00:04)

First up is a commercial that directly refers to the importance of the Super 
Bowl <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-bowl> to the advertising 
industry. A worried-looking executive reveals to a fellow drinker in a bar that 
he has a lot riding on the event but it isn’t Cam Newton’s throwing arm that 
will decide his fortune; it’s whether his cream cheese advert finds favour 
among the watching millions and – judging by the response of the other patrons 
in the bar – his client’s money could have been spent more wisely.


Honda: ‘Somebody to Love’ (starts at 01:08)

You can’t really go wrong with singing sheep, and Queen’s Somebody to Love 
proves the perfect vehicle for a spot of ovine karaoke. Crucially though, this 
clever advert also contains a pretty compelling proposition: if you spend half 
your working life in and around a flatbed truck, how cool would it be if you 
could carry on listening to your favourite music as you labour?


Heinz Tomato Ketchup: ‘Wiener Stampede’ (starts at 02:11)

If the singing sheep didn’t do it for you, then see if a field of stampeding 
dachshunds dressed as hot dogs can cut the mustard, as it were. They’re dashing 
towards people dressed as Heinz condiments while Harry Nilsson wails about 
being being unable to live Without You. A troubling reminder for those who 
don’t like to associate hot dogs with actual dogs but – let’s be honest – 
millions of Americans will be smacking their lips in anticipation at this sight.


Shock Top: ‘Unfiltered Talk’ (starts at 03:15)

Silicon Valley’s TJ Miller and comic Martin Montana star in this entertaining 
piece for craft beer Shock Top. Playing a bar customer and the beer’s mascot 
Wedgehead respectively, the pair fill the advert with a relentless barrage of 
quick-witted, inventive insults that they bat back and forth ... all of which 
were apparently ad-libbed.


Budweiser: ‘Helen Mirren’ (starts at 04:43)

No one can compete with Dame Helen Mirren when it comes to sexy 
schoolmarmishness, and – in this advert for Budweiser – she expresses with 
split-atom precision exactly what she thinks of those who drink and drive. Even 
those among the US audience who don’t know Mirren will be gripped by her accent 
and no-nonsense attitude ... and some will find the her stern discipline 
provides a veritable frisson of pleasure.


Kia: ‘Beige Socks’ (starts at 05:47)

Christopher Walken possesses a limitless charisma that can’t be dented by his 
frequent appearances in TV commercials and here he proves the perfect advocate 
for the idea that we should avoid making beige choices. If Walken says it’s so 
then it is and – as usual – his distinctive delivery is simultaneously comic 
and deadly earnest.


Rocket Mortgages: ‘What We Were Thinking’ (starts at 07:10)

This dynamic advert for a financial services company promising to make it as 
easy to secure a loan to buy a house as it is to download music appears to be 
operating in a universe where the sub-prime mortgage disaster never happened. 
It’s a brilliantly attractive commercial and highly persuasive to boot but, 
come on, America, try to remember what happened last time you made it possible 
to secure a mortgage without checks and balances!

Avocados From Mexico: ‘Avocados in Space’ (starts at 08:13)

Guacamole enthusiasts, sci-fi fans, and even Happy Days aficionados will all 
find something to enjoy here. Leading a tourist group who wouldn’t look out of 
place in the Mos Eisley Cantina, a museum guide provides a colourful insight 
into an assortment of earthly curiosities. This is packed with gags and proves 
a worthy successor to last year’s well-received Super Bowl advert.


Apartments.com: ‘Movin’ On Up’ (starts at 09:17)

Jeff Goldblum’s turn as tech impresario Brad Bellflower was one of the 
highlights of last year’s Super Bowl advertising, so it’s great to see him 
return in the same role. Never mind all the parochial references to vintage US 
comedy The Jeffersons, just enjoy the sight of Goldblum soaring as he sings the 
1970s sitcom’s theme song.


T-Mobile: ‘Restricted Bling’ (starts at 10:21)

Rap star Drake demonstrates extraordinary compliance no matter what’s asked of 
him in this funny advert for T-Mobile which aims to suggest that the network’s 
rivals “ruin everything”, but a longer version with him actually incorporating 
the lines “device eligible for upgrade after 24 months” and “streaming music 
will incur data charges” into his song wouldn’t go amiss.

Jason Stone is the editor of David Reviews <http://www.davidreviews.tv/>
