
I’m a cricket fan and I know this places me in a minority. Moreover, I’m a fan 
of four-day county matches, which places me in a minority of a minority.

That’s not to say I don’t like ODIs and the Twenty20 format. But speed cricket 
is no way to learn how to compete at international level in five-day tests.

County cricket is unloved by regional newspapers nowadays. Editorial budgets 
are too squeezed to allow for journalists spending a whole day covering matches 
only for their reports to be read by few people.

Publishers and editors, even if reluctantly, have turned their backs on the 
county games. Indeed, many one-day matches are not covered by staff writers 
either.

It’s no wonder that David Hopps, editor of the cricket website ESPNcricinfo 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/>, should lament the “indifference” to cricket by 
“the traditional newspaper sector.”

But that indifference is no media conspiracy against the sport. It simply 
acknowledges the public’s lack of interest. There is no audience for cricket 
reports and, going on my last visit to a Sussex home game at Hove, precious 
little audience of any kind.

In pointing out that much of the county coverage that does exist is 
financially supported by the England and Wales Cricket Broad (ECB),Hopps writes:
 <http://www.espncricinfo.com/magazine/content/story/1024073.html>

“The world for a cricket writer in England, beyond the international circuit, 
is an unforgiving one, and the resilience and talent of those who find a way to 
survive is deeply impressive.

The few who remain, and remain entirely independently, continue to provide 
vital surveillance of the professional game, striving to keep it honest, 
challenging its decisions – or lack of them.”

He places his faith instead in social media, arguing that the 18 first-class 
counties aggregate more than half a million followers on Twitter, with even 
more on Facebook.

He also mentions ECB’s @countychamp <https://twitter.com/countychamp> Twitter 
feed. But, I note sadly, it had a mere seven tweets in the course of the past 
week.

As if that isn’t bad enough, the Guardian’s Sean Ingle wrote last summer about 
the small audiences for TV coverage by Sky Sports of test matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/12/ashes-sky-england-australia-ecb-tv>
. He wrote:

“As things stand, English cricket is in danger of becoming a sporting version 
of the Church of England, with an ageing demographic who attend because they 
always attend, and believe because they have always believed.

Meanwhile younger generations will barely notice its slow and graceful slide 
into irrelevance.”

I fear he is right. I have tried to enthuse my grandsons with the joys of 
cricket, without any success. The most sporting of the trio is a football 
fanatic and shows an aptitude for tennis too.

He has good eye-to-ball coordination, but my attempts to get him interested in 
cricket - buying kit, bowling at him, sitting him in front of televised tests - 
has not changed his mind.

Like all but one of his school friends, he just doesn’t see the point (and his 
school cannot be faulted because, to its credit, it provides ample cricket 
facilities).

He indulged me for a while by watching a session of England’s third test 
against Sri Lanka, but I could tell he was bored despite Jonny Bairstow’s 
excellent knock.

I accepted long ago that cricket in Britain was gradually becoming something 
of a niche sport. Now I fear it will vanish altogether in the not-too-distant 
future.

But don’t blame the mainstream media. Newspaper content - especially lack of 
newspaper content - reflects an uncomfortable reality about the growing 
unpopularity of a game I have loved all my life.
