
Today is the one day of the year when perhaps dad can expect to take it easy 
and bask in the adulation of his family. But maybe he should use Father’s Day 
to thank his offspring for what they have done for him – and apologise to his 
wife for the effect they have had on her finances.

The curious phenomenon of the “father bonus” was first identified four years 
ago 
<http://www.ippr.org/news-and-media/press-releases/dads-earn-more-while-mothers-earn-less>
 by the Institute for Public Policy Research, which analysed the link between 
parenthood and wages for those with full-time jobs. It found that being a 
parent brings a wage “penalty” for women, and a wage “bonus” for men. Now the 
thinktank has produced analysis that explores the phenomenon in detail and 
suggests there are significant variations according to the father’s 
socio-economic background.

For fathers in the north, the bonus is 18%, compared with 22% for those in the 
south. On average, the bonus for a dad in the private sector is 18% and in the 
public sector is 21%. Fathers with degrees can expect a bonus of 23%, compared 
with those without a degree, who can expect to earn 16% more.

Dads also experience a bonus for having two or more children, above and beyond 
that of being a father of one child. The findings are in stark contrast to the 
experience of working mums.

Women who become mothers before 33 typically suffer a 15% pay penalty compared 
with women without children. “On Father’s Day, it is great to celebrate the 
fact that fathers in the UK are playing a more active role in their children’s 
lives than ever before,” said the IPPR’s associate director, Clare McNeil. 
“More dads are now likely to see parenting as central to their identity, and to 
appreciate the benefits of parenthood. But we have been slower as a society to 
reflect these changes at home and in the workplace.”

Experts are divided on the reasons for the fatherhood bonus. There is some 
evidence that, on becoming a father, men increase their earning capacity 
because they feel a greater responsibility to be the breadwinner, and to 
compensate for their partner’s reduced earnings.

Labour market figures show that men with children work slightly longer hours 
on average than those without. In contrast mothers, even those in full-time 
jobs, tend to work shorter hours than similar women without children.

Other research suggests that fatherhood is valued by employers because of the 
perceived loyalty it may bring. Research in the US found that CVs from fathers 
were more highly scored than identical ones from non-fathers, while the 
opposite effect was observed in women’s CVs.A survey by the Fawcett Society 
<http://www.fawcettsociety.org.uk/2016/03/motherhood-penalty-for-women-and-daddy-bonus-for-men/>
 found that three in 10 Britons think men are more committed to their job after 
having a baby – and nearly half of respondents think women are less committed 
after having children.

“Families where the dad is the sole breadwinner are in the minority these 
days,” McNeil said. “Mums are not only more likely to be working, but also to 
be working full time.”

Some men will want to work longer hours on becoming a father, she said, 
perhaps to make up for their partners working fewer hours. But with dads 
playing a more active role in their children’s lives, others may want to 
request flexible working or time off to balance work and family life.

“Countries that offer affordable, high-quality childcare, parental leave 
equally shared between mum and dad, and flexible work for both women and men, 
do better in helping parents balance work and care,” she said. “UK employers 
and policymakers need to catch up and reflect both parents’ aspirations to 
spend more time with their children.”
