
When Helen Atkinson addresses a typical lecture hall of 170 engineering 
students, it is likely that fewer than 25 of them will be female. Elsewhere in 
the same university, her colleagues in psychology will face a similar sea of 
faces dominated by one gender – except this time the exceptions will be male.

Atkinson, head of the department of engineering at the University of Leicester 
and chair of the education and skills committee at the Royal Academy of 
Engineering, says nationally the proportion of women studying engineering has 
been creeping up – but only creeping – from about 12% in 2008 to 15% in 2015.

In other subjects the balance is just as skewed. Latest figures from the 
Higher Education Statistics Agency 
<https://www.hesa.ac.uk/component/content/article?id=3484&amp;ItemId=278?> show 
nearly 80% of those studying nursing and other subjects allied to medicine are 
women, while 83% of computer science students are men. In teaching, more than 
76% of students are women, but in architecture, men dominate.

There have been many attempts to try to redress such imbalances but they have 
tended to be one-off initiatives, says Ellen Pugh, policy adviser at the 
Equality Challenge Unit. But, she says, research by the Higher Education 
Academy, to be published this month, has identified the need for a longer term, 
more wide-ranging approach.

In this, Scotland is leading the way. The Scottish Funding Council 
commissioned the HEA research and, also this month, will produce its final 
gender action plan on addressing gender imbalances at subject level. Itsinterim 
plan <http://www.sfc.ac.uk/communications/news/2016/GAPInterimReport.aspx>, 
published in February, promised to “outline the case for positive action; 
detail how it can be effectively implemented and encourage its use across the 
sectors”.

Related: Recruit women, urges engineers’ first female leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/20/britain-needs-thousands-female-engineers>

It stated that no subject should have a gender imbalance of more than 75:25 by 
2030. It wants to increase the proportion of men at university generally by 
that time to reduce the gap between male and female participation – now 13.8% – 
by five percentage points, focusing particularly on men from deprived areas.

The targets will be linked to universities’ outcome agreements – negotiated 
agreements between institutions and the funding council that set out what they 
are expected to deliver in return for public funding.

Rachel Adamson, senior policy officer at the Scottish Funding Council, says 
that while the targets are long term, they will begin to be addressed in next 
year’s outcome agreements. But she says: “They are targets rather than quotas. 
It’s about encouraging them in the right direction.”

The University of Leicester has taken a similar approach through its 
involvement in the United Nations’HeForShe 
<http://www2.le.ac.uk/institution/heforshe> gender equality initiative. The 
university, one of 10 worldwide to be given the role of HeForShe impact 
champion, has identified six disciplines with the largest disparity between 
male and female enrolment – computer science, engineering, physics and 
astronomy, sociology, media and communications, and psychology – and will aim 
for a one percentage point change towards gender parity every year.

‘Scotland is leading the way. Its plan is for no subject to have a gender 
imbalance of more than 75:25 by the year 2030’

A new higher education institution due to open next year has gone even 
further. TheNew Model  <http://nmite.org.uk>in Technology & Engineering, 
Hereford, a private university specialising in science, is committed to 
achieving gender parity in both the staff body and faculty. Karen Usher, 
co-leader of the university development team, says it has worked with Olin 
College of Engineering in Massachusetts, which has made the same commitment, to 
work out how this can be done.

One step towards encouraging women is to emphasise ways physics can help solve 
global problems. Another is to focus on employment links.

But the university will also end the requirement for maths and physics 
A-levels, giving students other ways to achieve the knowledge they need, 
because of the problem that far fewer girls than boys take these subjects at 
A-level.

University College London’s civil, environmental and geomatic engineering 
department removed subject-specific entry requirements because of the limited 
numbers of women taking physics at A-level, and managed to improve male:female 
ratios. Similarly, Cambridge University managed to increase by 39% between 2010 
and 2012 the number of women on its natural sciences course choosing to 
continue with physics in the second year. It attributes this to a more gradual 
introduction to the mathematical aspects of the course and to more teamwork and 
structure in practical sessions.

Gender inequalities in schools are one of the biggest barriers to achieving 
gender parity at university, according to Susannah Lane, head of public affairs 
at Universities Scotland. She says: “It’s one of those issues that manifests 
itself at university but you don’t correct the problem if you just address it 
at university level. Unless you address the social pressures on children at 
school when making subject choices you aren’t going to bring about the level of 
change you want to. It comes down to girls playing with certain sets of toys 
and boys with others.”

Related: How much do you know about women in engineering? – quiz 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/quiz/2015/jun/23/women-in-engineering-quiz>

In fact, she says university recruitment often ameliorates the problem. Boys 
taking physics highers outnumber girls 71:29 but the ratio is only 61:39 at 
degree level. In art and design girls outnumber boys 81:19 in highers but 64:36 
in degrees.

Mary Curnock Cook, chief executive of the Universities and Colleges Admissions 
Service, who has been concerned for some time aboutgender imbalance 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/21/gender-gap-university-admissions-record>
, and particularly the under-representation of men at university, says: “The 
sex gap in education begins long before university choices are made and many 
cultural norms need to be challenged.”

But it is a complex picture, says Pugh, with inequalities in education 
sometimes reflected differently in the workplace. Although the dominance of 
female undergraduates studying teaching creates more female teachers, there are 
still more male than female headteachers. Sociology is dominated by women at 
undergraduate level, but sociology professors remain overwhelmingly male.

At one university in the 80s, Atkinson came across male lecturers showing 
pictures of nude women in lectures and defending themselves with “it keeps the 
men awake”. While much more still needs to be done, at least, she says: 
“Nowadays no university would contemplate that.”
