
Fintan O’Toole’s Irish Times column today 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/fintan-o-toole-loud-silence-on-public-interest-in-siteserv-affair-1.2233683>
, in which he argues that “the definition of excessive private power is that it 
ceases to be private”, deserves as big an audience as possible.

He is referring to the legal attempt by Ireland’s media tycoon, Denis O’Brien, 
to prevent light being shed on his banking arrangements. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/jun/01/irelands-leading-media-outlets-challenge-denis-obrien-injunction>

As I write, the Irish Times and RTÉ are in court seeking to clarify the scope 
of O’Brien’s injunction that hasstopped them from reporting a statement made in 
the Dáil, Ireland’s parliament 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/01/irish-media-seek-right-to-report-on-denis-obriens-ties-with-ibrc>
.

I hope lawyers take to heart O’Toole’s argument in which he writes that 
O’Brien “has accumulated excessive private power” and “been allowed to take 
effective control of the largest Irish newspaper group and of two of 
[Ireland’s] three national talk radio stations”.

As he points out, O’Brien’s “desire to control what is said about him in the 
media and in the Dáil has created a constitutional crisis”. He continues:

“It is the inevitable result of an individual having too much power. That 
individual will always see the democratic consequences of his exercise of that 
power as a purely private matter.

O’Brien’s response to the questions raised by Catherine Murphy about his 
acquisition of Siteserv from IBRC has been a deep and obviously sincere sense 
of personal affront.

He doesn’t see it as a public matter at all. To him, all that is happening is 
that some busybodies in politics and the media are poking their noses into his 
private affairs.

The problem is that no part of the state has done anything to uphold the other 
side of the argument and to protect the public interest. The high court, in 
granting O’Brien an injunction against RTÉ, showed little grasp of the public 
interest in knowing what a bank it owns is up to”.

He defends Murphy, the independent MP, for “doing no more than her democratic 
duty” by raising questions about O’Brien’s relationship with the IRBC. She is, 
he writes, trying “to get some accountability for the use of public resources”.

He goes on to castigate the minister for finance, Michael Noonan, for his 
“contemptuous answers” to Murphy’s initial questions about the Siteserv deal.

And he criticises three other responses by the state that fail the test of 
democracy before making a brilliant point about the threat to whistle-blowing 
should the court maintain that the injunction can overrule parliamentary 
privilege:

“The allegation levelled by O’Brien’s side is that the alleged information 
Murphy has placed on the Dáil record is ‘stolen’ and thus illegal.

If this is upheld, as it seemed to be in the granting of the injunction, all 
protections for whistleblowers collapse; all information given by concerned 
insiders will be stolen property”.

O’Toole concludes that it should not be up to RTÉ or his newspaper to go to 
court to protect the right of the people’s elected representatives to raise 
questions in parliament. “It is time for some arm of the state to show it knows 
what public interest means”. Bang on the money there, Fintan.


See also Lisa O’Carroll’s report on O’Brien’s “scathing attack on his critics” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/irish-tycoon-denis-obrien-critics-anglo-irish-bank-injunction>
.
