
Nearly four years ago, my younger brother, Steve, moved with his wife to 
Pittsburgh,Pennsylvania <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania>, and 
immediately began urging me to visit – in part to see him (I guess?) but mostly 
because he was fascinated by what he called the 
“cosmopolitanization-in-a-blue-collar-town” food scene.

“This is a city where Primanti Bros sandwiches are still extremely popular,” 
he emailed me, referring to the famously over-stuffed subs, “and yet bit by 
bit, international immigrants are changing the food landscape.” Chinese and 
Korean restaurants were the ones he was most excited about, but he was also 
excited about the “lively” farmers’ market. It was as if he’d stumbled on a 
secret only he (and 300,000 Pittsburghers) were privy to.

Well, the secret is out: Pittsburgh is officially a good place to eat, topping 
Zagat’s list of America’s 17 best food cities 
<https://www.zagat.com/b/the-top-17-food-cities-of-2015> thanks not just to 
plentiful Sichuan dan-dan noodles but to “refined food glories” like “jamón 
croquetas with leek-ash aïoli”, “jerk pork and yam coulis”, and “rabbit 
accompanied by semolina gnocchi”. For various reasons, I’ve never made it out 
to Pittsburgh myself, but thanks to Zagat’s picks, I’m eagerly anticipating a 
trip there in April.

Except …

Except that Zagat’s is not the only list of Best Food Cities out there. We are 
at the beginning of a new year, and so any publication interested in food is 
decreeing a new slate of locales worth visiting just for the food.Over at the 
Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sf/style/2015/12/21/the-10-best-food-cities-in-america-ranked/>
, those cities include Charleston, South Carolina (No 10), Houston (No 5), and, 
at No 1, Portland, Oregon.At National Geographic Traveler 
<http://travel.nationalgeographic.com/travel/top-10/food-cities/>, overseas 
culinary icons like Lyon (No 5), Osaka (No 7), and Bologna (No 8) rub shoulders 
with Buffalo, New York (No 3), and the top pick, Louisville, Kentucky. 
Louisville also makes a strong showing onthe Jetsetter top 1 
<http://www.jetsetter.com/feature/next-great-food-cities>0, coming in at No 2, 
just behind Stockholm and edging out Madrid (No 3) and Hanoi (No 9).

Without even looking at the mid-year lists from a dozen other publications, 
these catalogs encompass 26 US and 13 foreign destinations – how do we make 
sense of them in order to start planning our gluttonous vacations?

Well, to start with, we can be cynical. Just look at how these lists are 
constructed:

For the most part, they include major cities that have, more or less, been 
good places to eat for quite a while. What kind of radical cojones does it take 
to suggest New York City, Chicago or Madrid? That’s not to say there aren’t 
year-to-year variations in the kinds of restaurants that open up and come to 
influence how we cook and eat across the country and around the world, but to 
give San Francisco a spot on such a list is an insult to the intelligence of 
anyone who cares about eating. We know already.

After the majors, though, it gets more interesting: Which second- and 
third-tier cities does a list-maker choose? After all, the United States has so 
many of them – surely they can’t all be worth a hungry traveler’s time and 
money?

If we’re going to stay cynical, we could select a number of criteria to use. 
Is the publication hoping to please the tourism board of Louisville? (The local 
news there sure seems happy 
<http://www.courier-journal.com/story/life/food/2016/01/04/worlds-best-food-city-you-live/78262304/>
.) Do any of the compilers have family in, say, Providence, Rhode Island? Did 
they vacation in Oakland, California? Are these lists essentially put together 
at random, by well-meaning food lovers pressured by their editors to transform 
their broad but by no means complete knowledge of the world food scene into 
something people will argue about on Facebook?

American dining has been transformed

But let’s not be cynical – that’s too easy. Let’s go the other way: However 
these lower-tier cities may have made it onto the lists, you can be fairly well 
assured that each and every one does have pretty excellent food. How can I be 
sure of this? Because everywhere in America has pretty excellent food nowadays.

I know: This is a hard idea to get used to. It wasn’t so long ago that eating 
well was a challenge outside America’s major cities. In 2001, I drove 
cross-country from New York to California, and didn’t drink a halfway-decent 
cup of coffee till I was within sight of the Pacific Ocean. On another 
cross-country trek, in 2007, the culinary highlight was Oklahoma City, whose 
dozens of Vietnamese restaurants provided much-needed relief from midwestern 
blandness. There were diner pies and patty melts and barbecue, some of it 
pretty tasty, but very little of it created with the ambition or presented with 
the pride I found in major cities.

Since then, though, American dining has been transformed. Locavorism and the 
farm-to-table movement shifted chefs’ and diners’ focus back toward the 
birthplaces of ingredients and dishes, while food trucks let anyone with a 
dream become a cook. Chances are, you live a mere keg’s throw from a craft 
brewery, and cocktails and spirits are so popular that we’re constantly on the 
verge of a bourbon shortage 
<http://thewhiskeywash.com/2015/06/02/bourbon-shortage-keep-hearing/>. Even 
ultra-local dishes – like Louisville’s hot brown or Cincinnati’s chili – are 
newly valorized, both in their original, often downscale forms and as 
reinvented updates 
<http://www.courier-journal.com/story/life/food/cooks-corner/2014/07/29/recipe-winstons-chef-john-castros-brown/13311763/>
. Finally, Instagram has let everyone see what everyone else is cooking and 
eating – everywhere in the world. Sure, if you want to get rich and famous, you 
can open a killer restaurant in Brooklyn or Chicago, but you can do it in 
Columbus or Richmond, too.

I’m hardly the first person to notice the abundance of good food all over 
America. Back in mid-2012, Brett Martin wrote a long feature in GQ, “The Best 
Place to Eat Right Now Is … 
<http://www.gq.com/story/best-fast-food-restaurants-in-america>,” making 
precisely that point, noting that even Boise, Idaho, had not one but two craft 
cocktail bars.

“We are now a nation with so many farmers’ markets that The New York Times has 
reported that farmers are getting a little worried,” he wrote. “A nation in 
which phrases like ‘Kosher in Fargo?’ or ‘Filipino in Detroit?’ – which once 
would have been failed pitches for fish-out-of-water sitcoms – are now 
perfectly reasonable queries on foodie boards. We the people have come to rely 
on, indeed feel entitled to, good food everywhere.”

At the time the story came out, I thought it would pretty much end the 
list-making. Here, I figured, was proof that we were in a new, enlightened era 
of eating, one that no longer required breathless copy extolling the sudden 
culinary transformation of America’s lesser metropolises. Clearly, I was wrong.

But the lists themselves, as Brett Martin himself pointed out to me the other 
day, are not necessarily useless. “I think the best lists of that kind are more 
than ‘these are the cities most like Brooklyn,’” he wrote via Facebook. “That’s 
the dark side of Good Food Everywhere – Same Food Everywhere. A good list is 
great. It’s what you want to get from a friend.”

There I can agree. When the list feels written from an individual’s unique 
point of view, with a well-defined audience in mind, it’s a joy. Who am I to 
criticize the Washington Post’s Tom Sietsema for sharing with his readers the 
cities he’s most excited about? He knows them, they love him and his list 
satisfies them both. It’s only when the lists feel superficial, cynical or 
falsely objective that I get cranky. But hey, those other publications gotta 
eat, too.

By now, surely, you’re wondering about my own 2016 list. Well, I can tell you 
that Pittsburgh is now definitely on it, thanks to Steve and his wife having 
just had a baby. It is, however, technically at No 3 on the list. I hope the 
tourism board will forgive me.
