
People who use adblockers when using the web could be some of the most 
valuable people to show ads to, according to a new report.

The report’s authors say people who block ads could generate more money for 
publishers because they are likely to be tech savvy and in the “millennial” age 
range that advertisers want to reach, are less likely to be bots (computers 
posing as humans), and are likely to see fewer ads overall.

The irony of the conclusion is not lost on the authors, but they claim 
publishers can still make money from people who have chosen to block ads by 
delivering “respectful advertising”.

The report, published by the International News Media Association, says: 
“Reaching the adblocking segment is a privilege that brands have never 
experienced before. Adblockers interact with ads when they see them more than 
standard web users – presumably because they see no other ads.

“And those brands that are seen – with low volume, respectful ads – receive 
more attention than the most garish and brazen formats have been able to 
achieve when competing in the world before adblocking. For publishers, this 
presents a counter-intuitive opportunity: adblockers can be leveraged as a 
high-value segment that can be presented to premium brands with premium 
advertising.”

The report also warns that publishers should be wary of relying too heavily on 
so-called “walled gardens” offered by tech companies such as Facebook and 
Snapchat, which offer ways to provide content with ads that can’t currently be 
blocked. It says that not only do these platforms gain a high degree of control 
over the content, but they may also eventually be subject to adblocking 
themselves.

Related: Can publishers stop the ad blocking wave? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/20/ad-blocking-threat-publishers-apple-ios9>

Adblocking is one of a number of growing threats to online publishers that 
rely on advertising. The practice has been on the rise in recent years, 
particularly on desktops and laptops. However, growth in adblocking on mobile 
devices, driven in part by Apple’sdecision to allow the practice in its Safari 
web browser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/17/adblockers-ios-9-app-charts-peace>
, is a growing concern as people switch to reading articles and other content 
on their phones.

PageFair, which sells services to publishers to measure and attempt to 
counteract adblocking and contributed to the report, has estimated that total 
lost revenue from adblocking grew from $5.8bn to $10.7bn between 2014 and 2015 
in the US, $1.6bn to $3.6bn over the same period in the UK.

The company also predicts the total lost revenue from ad blocking could 
$41.4bn this year. However, the figures are an approximate calculation based on 
total revenue and adblocking rates, meaning the real figures could be 
significantly lower or higher.
