 When Edward Heath, who has died aged 89, took Britain into the European 
Economic Community in 1971, it was the culmination of a lifetime of undeviating 
effort. Europe was his great theme - from his maiden speech in 1950 on the 
Schuman plan for coordinating western Europe's steel industries, to the ones he 
was still making half a century later, when Tony Blair was in 10 Downing Street 
and his own battles with his successor as Conservative leader, Margaret 
Thatcher, had entered history.
When an earlier Conservative prime minister, Harold Macmillan, first applied 
to join the then European Common Market in the early 1960s, Heath was in charge 
of the unsuccessful British negotiating team. His widely praised work won him 
the Charlemagne prize.

Shortly before Heath became prime minister in 1970, the third British 
application to join the Common Market had been submitted by Labour's Harold 
Wilson. But Wilson's singleness of purpose was in doubt. Heath's was not. On 
October 28 1971, the Commons voted with a 112 majority to go into Europe.

After that, little went well. Singlemindedness and determination could also 
look like obstinacy and arrogance. Heath had won the 1970 election - against 
all the forecasts - with a majority of 30 and an unchallenged personal 
authority; he lost that in 1974, amid gloom and industrial chaos.

The 1970 victory had been preceded by talk of competitiveness, lower taxes, 
the hunting down of "lame duck" industry, a curb on public spending and an 
assault on what was seen as untrammelled trade union power. But then events, as 
Macmillan would have said, intruded.

In 1971 Rolls-Royce faced bankruptcy and was partly nationalised and bailed 
out, as was Upper Clyde Shipbuilders. The attack on unions triggered the 1972 
saga of the Pentonville 5, while the battle with the miners ended in victory 
for the NUM. Public spending rocketed. In Northern Ireland, internment was 
followed by Bloody Sunday and the beginning of the IRA assault on mainland 
Britain.

Internationally, in the wake of the Yom Kippur war, energy prices went up 
four-fold, and in 1973-74 there was renewed conflict with the NUM, the slide 
into the three-day week and the February 1974 election, called around the 
slogan, "Who governs?" The answer turned out to be Wilson, after a near 
dead-heat between the Labour and theConservatives 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>.

Wilson called another election that October. He won a majority of three, but 
for many Tory MPs losing was a sin. In 1975, Margaret Thatcher won the 
leadership from Heath. While it may have been radical for the Conservatives to 
choose a woman, from Heath's point of view the irony was that they had chosen 
another meritocrat.

For that was where he had come in. His party had seen the need in the 
mid-1960s to set Heath, their own meritocrat, to catch Labour's formidable 
Wilson, and that confrontation dominated a decade of British parliamentary life.

Wilson was loquacious, self-justifying, scornful, though anxious to please, 
fundamentally warm-hearted. Heath was tight-lipped, introverted, seemingly 
cold. Yet his performance was more effective than the headlines often made out, 
even if his carelessness about image-building must at times have been the 
despair of what are now labelled spin doctors.

After Thatcher toppled him, his incapacity to do or say the right thing verged 
on high comedy. He regarded her as authoritarian, egotistical, intolerant, an 
aberration among Conservative leaders. There was no doubting their mutual 
dislike.

Pointedly she left him out of her shadow cabinet when he and many observers 
were expecting him to be offered the foreign affairs brief. One of the most 
bizarre episodes in 20th century Britain's politics ensued.

Onlookers were astonished, delighted, appalled, according to temperament and 
party. Some were all three as Heath delivered speech after critical speech. It 
might all have been dismissed as disgruntled soliloquies from a soured man, 
were it not that the drama increasingly involved the central theme of Heath's 
career: Europe. Thatcher, as he saw things, was pursuing a narrow nationalism 
that militated against this country playing a full part in Europe.

The great issue is still unresolved, all these years after Heath led the 
British to Brussels. This lingering insularity, encouraged by what he regarded 
as the obstinate egotism and narrow vision of his successor, provided him with 
a cause that saved him from that elder statesman's fate of subsiding into the 
Lords or persisting on the Commons backbenches like an extinct volcano. Heath 
declined to be extinct. He and his great theme remained active. And after 
Thatcher's memorable fall in November 1990, her predecessor wore Westminster's 
widest, toothiest smile and borrowed one of her own phrases: "Rejoice, rejoice".

In July, 1965, Heath was the first Conservative leader to be chosen by secret 
ballot of MPs, the election having broken with the patrician system by which 
his predecessor, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, had "emerged" as leader in 1963. But it 
was Douglas-Home during his leadership who had instituted that ballot as a 
means of selecting, and deselecting, leaders.

Heath's origin and career were in sharp contrast with those of his 
aristocratic predecessor. His father had been a Kent carpenter before becoming 
a master builder, his mother a lady's maid. Born in Broadstairs, he began his 
education as a choral scholar at St Peter's, the local Church of England 
school, at seven he began piano lessons. He won a scholarship to Chatham House 
grammar school, Ramsgate, took his school certificate at 13, was playing the 
organ at 14 and conducting at 15. He won an organ scholarship to Balliol 
College, Oxford, became president of the university Conservative association in 
1937 and of the Oxford Union in 1939.

In those times he visited Nazi Germany and attended a Nuremberg rally, and, as 
a supporter of the Spanish republic, came under machine gun fire while driving 
down the Spanish coast. During the 1938 Oxford byelection which Quintin Hogg, 
the future Lord Hailsham, won as the pro-appeasement Conservative candidate, 
Heath worked for the anti-appeasement candidate, the then Master of Balliol, AD 
Lindsay.

That year too he won a scholarship to Gray's Inn, London. He never took it up 
because in 1939 came the second world war. He fought in north-west Europe with 
the Honourable Artillery Company, rose to lieutenant-colonel and was awarded 
the military MBE and mentioned in dispatches.

After the war, Heath became a civil servant, then took a post as news editor 
of the Church Times in 1947. Thatcher would have her husband's wealth behind 
her, but Heath, like John Major, William Hague , Iain Duncan-Smith, and Michael 
Howard, had to earn a living.

In 1948, he became a trainee in the finance house of Brown, Shipley and 
Company.

In 1949 at Bexley's "bread-rationing byelection" he reduced the Labour 
majority from 11,000 to 1,000. At the 1950 general election he won the 
redistributed seat with a 133 majority. After the Conservatives won the 1951 
general election, he became a junior whip and resigned from Brown, Shipley to 
devote himself to politics.

He was energetic, thorough, efficient and a master both of detail and of his 
temper. The public had some idea of his political attitudes from his 
contribution to the seminal Conservative pamphlet, One Nation (1950). But then 
he remained silent in the Commons as deputy chief whip (1953-55) and chief whip 
(1955-59), before emerging as labour minister.

From 1960-63, he was Lord Privy Seal with Foreign Office responsibilities and 
as such handled the Common Market negotiations. He was in his element, dealing 
with like-minded men over details of trade. Never caught out by questions, he 
emerged as a fervent European.

When Sir Alec Douglas-Home succeeded Macmillan as prime minister in 1963, 
Heath was promoted to secretary of state for industry, trade and regional 
development and president of the board of trade. His main work was to secure 
the enactment of the resale prices bill which, against stiff Conservative 
opposition, limited the scope of price agreements.

It was not until the Conservatives lost office in October, 1964, that the 
House had a fair opportunity to judge Heath's ability in a wider context. His 
ability, familiarity with trade and finance, toughness in controversy - all fed 
belief among Conservatives that he was the man to restore them to power. 
Nevertheless, when the leadership election came, in 1965, Heath did not win 
outright. But his rivals Reginald Maudling and Enoch Powell withdrew their 
candidacies before the second ballot and Heath became leader.

He was promptly confronted with the task of preserving party unity over policy 
towards Ian Smith's white minority regime in Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), when it 
made its 1965 unilateral declaration of independence. UDI challenged the 
authority of the crown and parliament and Wilson's government took steps - 
mainly sanctions - to undermine the Smith regime. There was a strong 
Conservative element, led by Lord Salisbury, which supported Smith. But, backed 
by Douglas-Home, Heath overcame the revolt.

Then came 1966, the high tide of Wilson's political ascendancy, a 98-seat 
Labour majority in place of the four-seat majority which had determined the 
1964 result. Probably no Conservative could have defeated Labour in that year, 
but for Heath's enemies, later, that defeat would be seen as a harbinger of 
worst times to come.

By 1968 Labour's popularity had plummetted. Yet it was that April that Powell 
made his "rivers of blood" speech on immigration. Neither Heath, nor any of his 
colleagues had been consulted. The Conservative leader sacked Powell, and thus 
opened up a fissure in his party which persisted.

In June 1970 Wilson called an election. He, and much of the media, assumed 
that victory was in the bag for Labour. But it was to be Heath's triumph, 
although it would last less than four years.

But Heath had hinterland, as his Oxford contemporary Denis Healey would say. 
By the time he quit the Commons in 2001, he was Father of the House, yet 
another addition to the honours, political, academic and artistic which he 
accumulated. And there was the music and the yachting. The latter saw him win 
the 1969 Sydney to Hobart race, captain Britain's 1971 Admiral's Cup team and 
be part of the 1980 Sardinia Cup team. His books included his Godkin lectures, 
Old World, New Horizons (1970), and Sailing A Course In My Life (1975).

Michael White writes: To stay in public life for 26 years after being rejected 
resoundingly by the electorate and one's own party suggests either implacable 
determination or bloody-minded stubbornness. In Heath's case it was both. 
Winston Churchill, the patron of his early promotion, was clearly his model. 
Both spurned the Lords, but Churchill was 80, not 58, when he left No 10 
trailing only slightly tarnished glory, not humiliation.

Critics dubbed it the longest sulk in parliamentary history. But Heath had 
much to say on many topics and, as a man whose sleeve had been brushed by 
Hitler's at a rally in Nuremberg in 1937, he brought increasingly unique 
insights to the task.

At times during the years he sat in his corner seat below the Commons gangway, 
it seemed as if he was determined to stay there until Thatcher was not only 
politically down, but ideologically out as well. Had he lived to attend her 
funeral, one can imagine him thinking he had finally made his point.

But nothing proved so cut and dried. The limits of economic Thatcherism had 
been demonstrated, especially in its monetarist manifestation. But the 
deregulated, privatised, market-oriented world she helped to create - rather 
more successfully than his own efforts - had triumphed almost everywhere.

As for Europe, the great cause of Heath's career, Britain's place in it, in 
the wake of the Dutch and French referendums is still not clear. Heath's 
contempt for wilder Eurosceptic Tory talk of withdrawal from the European Union 
, or membership of the North American Free Trade Agreement, was always total. 
It could be counter-productive in a house increasingly peopled by Tory MPs who 
had been taught to regard him as a traitor and by Labour ones who thought, 
wrongly, that he was almost one of them.

Towards the end he was often lumped together with his near-contemporary, Tony 
Benn. "Good Riddance" declared a Sunday Telegraph profile when the pair retired 
as MPs four years ago.

But right until the end of his parliamentary career he remained, like Benn, a 
speaker who could half-fill a near-empty chamber. Europe was his overriding 
preoccupation and he coupled it with a wariness of American policy and motives 
which made him the least pro-Washington postwar premier.

Industrial policy, relations with Russia and the wider world, especially 
China, where he advised the Beijing government and often defended it, were 
frequent topics. The author of the "unacceptable face of capitalism" jibe (his 
target was Lonrho) attacked corruption and poor performance among the captains 
of industry, deepening Tory enmity as much as his opposition to some of his 
party's privatisations.

That particular paradox was underlined when he spoke out fiercely against the 
widespread perception in the 1990s "sleaze era" that most MPs are less than 
honest and honourable. When he took that stance to the point of attacking the 
Nolan commission's report on reforming parliamentary accountability, few 
thought him wise.

Friends who had taken his finances in hand in the 1970s helped make him 
comfortably well off. In addition to the yacht Morning Cloud, Heath owned a 
modest terrace house in Wilton Street, Belgravia, and another, much more 
magnificent and dating from Queen Anne, in Salisbury's Cathedral Close.

Of the Chinese government's decision to put down the Tiananmen Square 
demonstrations in 1989, he said: "There was a crisis after a month in which the 
civil authorities had been defied. They took action. Very well." And his 
conciliatory approach to Saddam Hussein also attracted widespread criticism.

He was asked if he ever wondered if he was making the mistake that Neville 
Chamberlain had made. "No", he replied. In his defence, it could be said that 
former soldiers who have seen war are least keen to inflict it on others. But 
there was recurring evidence that he could be insensitive to democratic demands 
and insufficiently wary of authoritarian regimes.

As MP for Bexley, Bexley Sidcup and Old Bexley and Sidcup from 1950 - when his 
majority had been smaller than the number of votes which Mr Job, the Communist 
party candidate, took off Labour (he often toasted Mr Job) - Heath kept a good 
agent who looked after constituents' needs, and he did not outstay his welcome 
among local loyalists until close to the end. Whe he stood down in 2001, Derek 
Conway, a Eurosceptic ex-whip, won the seat.

The same election Tony Benn's seat went to the Lib Dems. Such are the 
indignities of political old age. But Heath's were more extensive, unusually 
so. His complaint was that the Thatcherites who so brilliantly ousted him from 
the leadership in 1975, never accorded him the courtesies to which an ex-leader 
and premier was entitled. Invitations to consult, or to No 10 dinners, were 
virtually non-existent. There was no cabinet job offered when Mrs Thatcher won 
office in 1979, except some vague talk of the Washington embassy, which he took 
(rightly) as an insult.

Apart from the Brandt commission on international development and north-south 
relations (1977-83), which was out of touch with the harsher temper of the 
times, he undertook few big public tasks, preferring to become what his 
lieutenant, Ian Gilmour, later called "the most distinguished backbencher since 
Richard Cobden" the Victorian apostle of free trade.

But his style, never light, underlined the impression that he was sulking. 
Even his jokes had a habit of sounding like pomposity or bad temper to those 
who did not know him. Often they were self-deprecating, albeit disguised.

For many years he invited a group of political reporters to dinner on the eve 
of the Tory conference, at Salisbury in the south or the Riverside hotel at 
Poulton-le-Fylde when the conference was in Blackpool. He may have had half an 
eye on the good opinion of posterity, but it was also generous. Reporters in 
their 30s could hear, firsthand of that brush with Hitler's arm.

"I am very good with widows," Heath would say. Certainly his later career, 
despite his many frustrations and disappointments, was neither lonely nor 
friendless. Lady Soames and Lady Woolf, the widow of his chief of staff, were 
among many who stayed loyal.

And if there had never been a wife to console his solitude there was always 
music. He was still to be found at the Salzburg annual music festival until 
2003.

Heath claimed to have visited every country in the world except North Korea, 
Bolivia and Paraguay. In many countries he was treated rather more respectfully 
than at home, where his candour was redefined as petulance by his critics

He remained determined that he would be vindicated, until close to the end.

· Edward Richard George Heath, politician, born July 9 1916; died July 17 2005.

· This obituary has been revised and updated since the deaths of Francis Boyd, 
in 1995 and Norman Shrapnel last year.
