
“Crazy March... here comes the sun, but take your umbrella,” or something like 
that, says the Roman proverb. It has been truer than ever this year, and, of 
course, I rarely have an umbrella, but I do have a small child, so endure my 
fair share of relatively good-hearted tutting from my neighbours that gather in 
the piazza when we pass by soaked.

I have also overheard my fruit and vegetable man Filippo saying Marzo 
pazzerello – crazy March – and then noting the crazy climate in general: 
everything is early. His peaches and apricots blossomed in February, he picked 
the first broad beans two weeks ago, peas and courgettes this week, but then 
the rain left the blossoms soggy. Yesterday morning, he loaded his van with the 
first spring produce – courgettes, broad beans with silvery green leaves and 
white buds, and the first bright-green peas – along with the end of the winter 
produce: fennel, broccoli, cauliflowers, spinach and the great piles of bitter
cicora(endives). Van loaded, he then drove, as he does every Tuesday through 
Saturday, the 160km from Minturno, a town on the coast midway between Naples 
and Rome, to Testaccio.

Even with soggy blossoms, zucchine romanesche (Roman courgettes), are handsome 
things – pale speckled green, and fluted like Corinthian columns. As with all 
squash, their ancestors were from the New World. But zucchini, derived from the 
Italian wordzucca – meaning squash or pumpkin, and ini, the diminutive 
(“little”) – seem to have been developed in Italy by late Renaissance 
gardeners. Once this crazy weather stops and the sun starts shining 
uninterrupted, courgettes will be prolific in southern Italy, as they are a 
doddle to grow, their fragile, rich yellowy-orange flowers like flames, or the 
head dress of a Las Vegas showgirl. The flowers shooting from the end of the 
courgette are female. The slightly smaller flowers with long firm stems that 
shoot directly from the main stem of the plant are male. The male ones are 
ideal for stuffing, as they have a closed cup and their long stem is helpful 
when you want to swoop it through batter. I should note that some of the most 
beautiful flowers I have ever seen on courgettes were in my brother-in-law’s 
garden in Shepherd’s Bush. Roman courgettes have a dense white flesh and an 
almost creamy, sweet freshness about them, as do the more familiar dark green 
variety, just as long as they are bright-skinned and not too big.

I am not going to call today’s recipes courgette carbonara, because I have 
found it best not to suggest anything is a carbonara – carbonara-like even – 
except carbonara. But it is very much inspired by the beloved Roman dish, in 
that it is a dish where the sauce is inseparable from the pasta. In the same 
way that, in carbonara,guanciale (cheek bacon) and its hot fat, pasta, egg and 
cheese come together, the elements of this dish – soft courgettes cooked in 
olive oil, beaten eggs, grated cheese and a slosh of pasta cooking water – come 
together to form a soft yellow cream on the strands of pasta.

Related: Rachel Roddy fritti recipe | Kitchen Sink Tales 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/15/rachel-roddy-deep-fried-apple-sage-courgette-fritti-recipe>

The cooking water, cloudy from the starch that has seeped from the pasta, is 
key. In the last minutes of cooking, scoop out a cup or jug full. Because I was 
forever forgetting and sloshing the pasta water down the sink, I now keep a 
glass measuring jug just by the stove to remind me. You will have already 
cooked the courgette strips until they are very soft – “like snakes” my son 
says. When the pasta is almost ready, you want to get the courgette pan hot 
again, then add the hot pasta, stir and turn off the heat. Now add the egg 
mixture, a splash of reserved water, and stir and swish it all around – really 
swish: the egg mixture is going to emulsify with this movement in the residual 
heat. If it looks dry, add more water and swish and swirl again – I use a big 
wooden fork. Practice is key here, so you recognise the moment when the sauce 
is thickening into a batter-like mixture, and if and when you need a bit more 
water. Some people do this over a low heat, but there is the risk of a scramble 
– which is still edible, but a scramble nonetheless. Then there is the risk of 
flooding it, which can often be rectified by a bit more cheese, a moment on the 
heat, more swishing.

Practise though, so you can enjoy for the eureka moment when it comes out just 
right, and the pasta slides in the soft cream. You could use spaghetti, but I 
like linguine. Its strands, like flattened spaghetti and almost the same size 
as the courgette, have a way of wrapping themselves around your tongue in the 
most overly familiar way – after all, linguine does mean “little tongues”. 
Basil is a final touch, the heat awakening the musty, sweetness of this almost 
irritatingly likable herb. Filippo doesn’t have any basil yet – still all too 
crazy – but he will plant now, and he hopes April –dolce dormire, “sweet sleep” 
– will be a good month.

Linguine with courgettes, egg and parmesan

Serves 4
1 medium onion, or 4 spring onions
300g courgettes
5 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
450g linguine or spaghetti
2 whole eggs, plus two extra yolks
70g grated parmesan
A few basil leaves
Salt and black pepper

1 Bring a large pan of water to the boil. Thinly slice the onion, then cut the 
courgettes into 5cm long, 2mm thick strips. In a large frying pan, warm the 
olive oil over a medium-low heat, then cook the onion and courgettes gently 
with a pinch of salt, turning them regularly with a wooden spoon until they are 
very soft and tender – which will take about 10 minutes. Remove the pan from 
the heat.

2 Add salt to a large pan of boiling water, stir, then add the linguine, 
fanning it out, and using a wooden spoon to push it down. Cook until al dente 
(check the cooking time of the packet and start tasting at least 2 minutes 
before).

3 While the pasta is cooking, in a largish bowl whisk together the eggs, extra 
yolks, cheese, a pinch of salt and lots of pepper. During the last minutes of 
pasta cooking time, put the courgette pan back on the heat to thoroughly warm 
the fat and vegetables.

4 Drain the pasta, reserving some of the cooking water. Add the pasta to the 
frying pan, stirring so it tangles with the vegetables. Turn off the heat, and, 
working quickly, add the egg mixture and a splash of pasta cooking water, then 
stir and swirl the pan vigorously until each strand is coated with creamy sauce 
and the consistency is slithery. Add a little more pasta cooking water if it 
seems too stiff and stir again. Rip the basil into the pan, stir again and 
serve.


 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award 