
Hazel Dawson, 18, has just got a B and two Ds in her A-levels 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, in sociology, government and 
politics, and geography at Christ the King sixth-form college in Lewisham, 
London.
 Hazel Dawson 
Since I don’t know what I want to do for my career, I couldn’t see a reason to 
go to university. Instead, I’m going to give myself those three years to try 
out lots of jobs, do courses and volunteering, and work out what I want to do 
that way.

I feel people my age aren’t allowed to be unsure of things – it’s all, “quick, 
make a decision about what you want to do for the rest of your life, and off 
you go”. But I’m embracing uncertainty – I want to try to find something I 
really love.

I’m training for a scheme where I can go into schools to help children learn 
to read, and applying for retail jobs for the money. I’m living at home: my 
parents have definitely got me for a while, but I tell them they’re lucky – it 
would cost a lot more money if I was off to uni.

All my friends are going, though – literally everyone in my year group. My mum 
supported my decision, but my dad was keen on me going to uni: he’s an academic 
– he went to university and never left – and he maintains I’ll become a student 
one day. Maybe I will, I think I’d appreciate it more when I’m older.

George Purchase, 18, took accounts, physics and chemistry A-levels at Barr 
Beacon school in the West Midlands. He got an A and two Bs.
 George Purchase 
Work experience made me realise I didn’t need to go to university. I did a 
week in the finance department of a hospital, and then another with 
[accountancy firm] PwC, and I really enjoyed it. At the end of the week, I was 
put through the assessment scheme … and was offered a place on the higher 
apprenticeship in tax.

I had intended to go to uni, but faced with a choice of going through Ucas and 
three years of studies, or going straight into work, with a guaranteed job as a 
tax technician while avoiding£9,000-a-year debt in fees 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/feb/26/university-education-parents-question-value>
, it seemed like a no-brainer. I talked to my parents about it – they didn’t go 
to university and although initially they were keen for me to get a degree, we 
agreed it was better to get straight in and get professional qualifications.

I’ll miss the comparatively laid-back life of education but I’m not worried 
about missing out on the social bit of uni. A lot of my friends are going to 
local universities, and with social media I can talk to everyone on Skype and 
play online games – technology means distance isn’t really an issue.

Edon Hudson, 18, got Ds in psychology and history A-levels and a pass in BTec 
photography at Bullers Wood school in Chislehurst, Kent.
 Edon Hudson 
I have depression, and found school and A-levels overwhelming. And after 
talking to friends at different unis about the workload, I knew I wouldn’t be 
able to handle it. Other things put me off too – like the £9,000 fees. My 
household income is very low: even paying to send off a Ucas application was 
out of the question [applications cost £23]. Not only that, but I don’t want to 
live knowing that I have tens of thousands of pounds of fees to pay back.

Neither of my parents went to uni – my dad went on to become a postman and my 
mum became a stay-at-home mum. At a younger age my parents talked to me about 
uni and how “if you have a degree you’ll be paid more in jobs”, but after 
growing up they knew that it was my life and I had to make my own decisions. 
I’m trying to find work to save up money. I’ve found it a struggle, though: 
many young people are trying to find summer jobs at the same time. For my 
long-term career, I want to be a musician – or anything creative.

Almost all of my friends are going to university. They’ll be having – as one 
put it – “the best time of my life”. Once I get a job, my social life will be 
non-existent. It does make me feel jealous. But I’ll try to make the best of 
any situation I end up in.

Carl Barrett, 18, scored a double distinction in BTec business and a merit for 
media at Thomas Tallis school, Greenwich, London.
 Carl Barrett 
I decided not to go to university because I feel I’ve outgrown education – I 
need to get into a work environment. I’m doing job training at MiddletonMurray, 
learning things like getting ready for interviews and polishing up my English, 
maths and ICT skills. Then I want to go into business and administration. My 
career dream for 10 years’ time is to be high up in an organisation. I think 
that working my way up will be faster than going to uni.

The huge fees swayed me too – and the cut to the maintenance grant, which I’d 
have definitely needed. Since I didn’t feel 100% committed to university, I 
thought I shouldn’t pay that much to go. My dad – who is a mechanic – went to 
uni, and he and my mum, who works in a school, were trying to lean me towards 
going too. But I explained my reasons and they agree.

Radhika Parmar, 18, did computer science, biology and maths A-levels at 
Kingsbury high school, London
 Radhika Parmar 
I want to work my own way up in tech and make something of myself – and after 
lots of research I decided that going to university wasn’t the best way to do 
that. My passion is to get more women interested in technology: we need to show 
we can do just as well as men, and to go from getting better grades than guys 
to having more female CEOs.

I heard about [technology consultancy firm] Capgemini in my computing lessons. 
They invited me to a “women in technology” event, and from there I secured a 
place on their higher apprenticeship scheme, where you get a degree that the 
company pays for, plus a salary. I’m getting the social part of student life, 
too, because during Capgemini’s three-months training we live in university 
accommodation.

When people hear I’m doing an apprenticeship they are way more interested than 
if I was just going to uni because it’s different. I think apprenticeships are 
the way forward – you get your experience alongside being able to work – uni 
just doesn’t offer anything as good as that.

• Lucy Tobin’s book on popular careers, The Book of Jobs 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/317850/>, is out now
