
Q I live in a rented terraced house with old, ill-fitting sash windows. Could 
you suggest how to insulate them without breaking the bank? The ideal solution 
would be to replace all the windows and fit them with double glazing, but the 
landlord will never accept such an expensive job.
Annette Kelly

A You have some classic thermal issues too costly to remedy for your tenancy, 
so in the short term think about the following to warm up your home and reduce 
your heating bills and carbon footprint. During the winter months, fit 
temporary double glazing. This can either be a polythene sheet that is adhered 
to the window frame and tensioned with a hair dryer, or a cut-to-size acrylic 
plastic sheet that is screwed to the frame. Fit thick curtains over the windows 
- think ready-made vintage from markets or second-hand shops, and make it 
stylish, too! Fit silver reflecting panels behind the radiators to kick the 
heat forward into the room, and cut draughts from doors and windows with foam 
or copper strips (trywww.homebase.co.uk <http://www.homebase.co.uk>).

Q I live in a two-bedroom flat with a friend, and space is at a premium. My 
son (who stays once a month for the weekend) is now ready for his first bed. He 
sleeps in my room, so can you recommend a bed (not a Z-bed) that converts into 
a chair/sofa when he isn't staying with me?
Jonathan Maydew

A Check out the range of brilliant AeroBed inflatable mattresses. I've got one 
for guests: it pops up in seconds with its built-in motor and is as firm as a 
conventional mattress. Deflated, it can be folded into a bag and neatly stored 
away. Prices for single beds start from £50, so this makes it a space-saving 
budget choice (go towww.aerobed.co.uk <http://www.aerobed.co.uk>). For the 
sophisticated option, take a look at the Dizzy range of fold-out single beds at
www.johnlewis.com <http://www.johnlewis.com>. Have it covered in warm brown 
leather, and no one will know that it's a bed by night. Prices range from £295 
for fabric, up to £595 in leather.

·  If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
