
Me and E, who is T's nanny for part of the time, were having an argument about 
whether he was saying "no" or "non". She is French. I, conversely, am not 
French. You can see where the contention lay. In fact, we were both right; he 
says both. He also has a long, disbelieving "no", as in "the very audacity! A 
man of my position etc etc". That's his Penelope Keith. Some of his "no"s are 
so well enunciated, you expect an arch, Wildean follow-up ("No-oh! I do not 
require a wipe, it is snot, not kryptonite. Tsk, women, the tyranny of their 
ministrations!"). There's an imperious, laboured "no", which reminds me a bit 
of Rumpole of the Bailey; there's a cheerfully final "no" that is almost a 
"nope" - he has as many words for "no" as the Eskimos have for "snow", except 
that they are all "no".

It is surprisingly annoying. Like, the first couple of times, it was just 
surprising, and then it started to annoy. Apparently, a blank "no" is annoying 
from anyone, whether they are 18 months old and your own flesh and blood, or a 
grown man from Trainline telling you you're stuck in Doncaster. Why else would 
anyone invent the words "thank you"? Why would it be such a central, 
entry-level brick of language? When it expresses such a mild, peripheral 
concept (gratitude ... I mean, where's gratitude, in the pantheon of 
sensations? It is probably only just above "soggy")? It's a kind of linguistic 
Darwinism; it stops you getting punched in the face. Let me stress that I have 
never considered punching T in the face, only the man from Trainline.

Every time T says anything that isn't "yes, Daddy, you're absolutely right", C 
says darkly, "he learnt that off his cousin", but even I have to admit that his 
vocabulary of disobliging remarks is out of all proportion to the rest of his 
skill set. Think of any word that is co-operative and nice, and he can say its 
opposite. He cannot say "yes" (E says he can say "oui"; I'm afraid, yet again, 
she is lying); he can't say "on" but he can say "off". "Up" is a total mystery 
to him, but he sings out "down" like Barbara Woodhouse. And then he says "out", 
triumphantly, as if, having exhausted all those other words, this is his 
closing, irrefutable argument. His cousin has more range, sprinkling outrageous 
demands in with the rigid refusals. (Her big thing is to see something she 
wants and yell "'ave it!", and the loudness will be in proportion with the 
impossibility. So it might be a lorry, and she'll stand there pointing at it 
and roaring "'AVE IT!" You can't object to this on the same terms, since a) 
"please" wouldn't help, and b) she looks like a tiny raver from the 90s. I want 
to teach T to shout "NECK IT!" at the same time, then I'd give them both a 
glow-stick and take them on tour. Unfortunately, I suggested this to T, and he 
said "Noooo".)

So, anyway, me and C and the incredibly contrary child are on holiday, and I 
wanted some Lemsip, only we're in France where pharmacists, as you will 
remember from your GCSE, probably, are incredibly opinionated. It is her 
opinion that, being pregnant, I shouldn't take anything with any active 
ingredients at all, so she's trying to flog me something homeopathic. Ha, she 
has meddled with the wrong pregger.

I can't even remember the French for "beer", and yet my boiling lack of 
respect for homeopathy in the area of cold and flu symptoms unlocks all this 
vocabulary: "Non," I start, with T standing next to me, going "non, non!". "Je 
préfère quelquechose qui ..." That appears to be the extent of my angry-French. 
Oh no, there's more ..."Quelquechose qui marche". I prefer something that works 
(or do I prefer someone that works? Never mind, she's got the picture). "No! 
Nooo! NON!" T interjects. She is looking at him awry. Is he cute, or have I 
trained a dwarf to insult her in stereo? "But you are pregnant?" "Paracetamol? 
En Angleterre, nous prenons paracetamol ..."

I want to pretend here that I remembered the French for "throughout our 
pregnancies", but actually I just let it hang. T filled for me with "Down! 
Down!"

Having finally wrestled some analgesia from this woman, she sternly says, "Au 
revoir", and T goes, "O Va". She raises her eyebrows. "Il parle Francais?" 
"Non! Non! Pas. Du. Tout!"

Now where am I going to go when I run out of indigestion tablets?
