
It was our neighbour, Richard B, who first mentioned it. “Sourdough wars,” he 
said ominously to my husband, down at the pub. “The new place versus the old 
place. There will be blood.” Later that night, T passed the news on to me. 
“Sourdough wars,” he said, rolling the words round his mouth experimentally. 
“Or so Richard says.” A few days passed, and then T went to buy Saturday 
morning croissants. When he returned, there was – to pinch from the divine Kay 
Burley – sadness in his eyes. “The old place was empty,” he said, handing over 
the booty. “But the new place was heaving.” In the silence that followed, my 
heart began to beat a little faster, and not only at the thought of the buttery 
carbohydrates to come.

When we first moved into our house a decade ago, the area was not gentrified, 
by which I mean that it hadn’t yet been socially cleansed. There was still a 
greasy spoon, a chip shop, and a Greek place so gloomy, patrons needed Clarice 
Starling-style night-vision goggles if they were to read the menu. But there 
was a very good patisserie, a beacon of hope for those (not me) who fixate on 
such things as house prices and the availability of the babycino (don’t ask), 
and a treat for the rest of us – or at least those of us lucky enough to be 
able to afford to patronise it. Let us call it, for the sake of argument, Le 
Grand Cafe de la Moyenne Bourgeoisie. Its owner is French, and it sells really 
excellent loaves and pastries, including the best coffee eclairs it has ever 
been my good fortune to taste.

A few weeks ago, however, another place opened a few doors down. Let us call 
it The Bushy Beard Diner. Yes, it’s a hipster joint, with a faintly industrial 
vibe and (probably) pig cheeks on its evening menu. I’m sure it’s very nice, 
and I plan to go there soon, the better to eat some roast celeriac and to gawp 
at all those young men in trousers that are just a little bit too short. 
Unfortunately, though, this place also does (it’s almost obligatory in the 
21st-century city) breakfast, and for all that its croissants are more 
expensive than those at Le Grand Cafe de la Moyenne Bourgeoisie, it seems to be 
cleaning up. The Bushy Beard makes Le Grand Cafe look faintly twee, I guess, 
plus there is, I can’t help noticing, a feeling abroad here now that at last we 
are – whoosh! – firmly on the way UP. The major symptom of this particular 
brand of collective madness is an overwhelming desire to spend more on 
breakfast – yeah, I’ll have avocado with that, and a Seize The Day Body 
Sculpting Smoothie with extra unbridled optimism and a few added half-truths – 
than is wholly wise.

I plan to go to the Bushy Beard Diner soon, the better to gawp at young men in 
trousers that are a little bit too short

When did food become the single most visible signifier of what we call, if 
we’re being polite, gentrification? I suppose it started in the 70s, when 
parents like mine bought dilapidated Victorian houses in urban streets and then 
spent seven years doggedly replacing all their original features (plus as many 
Japanese paper lampshades as Habitat could possibly supply). Local 
greengrocers, sensing an opportunity, began stocking bags of macaroni and 
lentils the better that willowy local mothers with serious Clothkits habits 
might stuff them in the hoods of their baby buggies along with their potatoes 
and carrots. Meanwhile, family butchers believed for the first time in ages – 
and as things turned out, they weren’t wholly right – that they might just be 
able to survive the arrival of Fine Fare or Kwik Save. In their windows, still 
sprigged with lurid plastic grass, lamb chops suddenly started wearing jaunty 
white paper hats.

And yet, how benign, how wonderfully inexpensive and wholesome, mere pasta and 
pulses and lamb chops seem beside the orgasmic smorgasbord of over-priced 
foodstuffs the middle classes seem now to require to be on hand in their 
neighbourhood if they’re to feel even moderately content (start at jamon 
Iberico, and “curate” your shopping up from there, price-wise). I do wonder 
about this edible escalation, a frenzy that shows no sign of slowing down any 
time soon. Is it that, houses being an almost hopeless dream for a new 
generation, people think “oh, sod it”, soothing themselves thereafter by 
throwing their money at artisanal brownies and hand-roasted coffee rather than, 
as they might once have done, at wooden bookshelves and salvaged door handles? 
Or is it just that some people are stupid and vulgar and – though they’d rather 
die than admit it – too well off to care? Answers on a Tate Modern postcard 
please.
