
Q I have two built-in wardrobes on an outside wall. Things put in them get 
mildewed. How can I treat this problem? I'd prefer to avoid 
dehumidifer/low-wattage heater methods if possible.
Mary

A I suspect you have entered the murky, mouldy world of interstitial 
condensation. Older buildings were built to 'breathe', allowing moisture levels 
to balance inside and out. As buildings are now sealed with 'modern' paints and 
new windows, moisture from human occupation (you!) gets trapped and condenses 
on to the inner layer of external walls as the temperatures outside drop. This 
causes mould to form on the walls. So insulate the wall with external, cavity 
or internal-wall insulation. If it's the last one, a vapour-control layer will 
need to be fitted. Alternatively and more cheaply, first ventilate the whole 
room continuously with a window trickle vent and also fix vents to the cupboard 
fronts to allow fresh air to circulate. For more information, see
www.buildingconservation.com <http://www.buildingconservation.com>.

Q We have a 14-month-old daughter and a small yard floored with rough 
concrete. I want her to be able to play safely. Is there such a thing as DIY 
rubber paint? Or can you recommend any exterior floor covering that is cheap 
and easy to lay? Or should I just get some self-levelling concrete and paint it 
with masonry paint? Sadly, the yard doesn't get any sun, so any 
plant/grass-based ideas are out.
Alex Bond

A To smooth over the concrete, fit the patio area with a rubber tile similar 
to those in playgrounds. For permanent tiles with real bounce and safety, try 
30mm recycled-rubber (called TERRAlastic) floor tiles fromwww.uacgroup.co.uk 
<http://www.uacgroup.co.uk>. For a more economic temporary surface, try 
colourful rubber floor tiles (trywww.happylandings.co.uk 
<http://www.happylandings.co.uk> or DIY stores). But for a surface that's good 
for you, your little girl and the environment, try a wood and recycled-plastic 
decking - I've fitted that in my patio. It has a smooth but slip-resistant 
surface and doesn't need annual maintenance or go green every year like timber 
(seewww.maine-deck.co.uk <http://www.maine-deck.co.uk>).

·  If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
