
Hampton Court Palace has played host to some weird and wonderful stories over 
the centuries, but the story told in the palace’s 2016 exhibition,The Empress 
and the Gardener <https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/304155071;133262059;s>, 
must be one of the unlikeliest.

The exhibition hosts a rare collection of 18th-century drawings and 
watercolours of Hampton Court and its gardens – drawn on-site by John Spyers, a 
garden surveyor who worked in the office of famed landscape architect Lancelot 
“Capability” Brown, when Brown was chief gardener at the palace.


Somehow, the little-known Spyers pulled off the coup of his career by selling 
his portfolio to the anglophile Catherine the Great of Russia, for the 
life-changing sum of 1,000 roubles.


In this fascinating exhibition, we learn how Catherine loved gardens in the 
naturalistic landscape style popularised by Brown, and even recreated them by 
hiring a Scottish gardener to landscape the gardens of Peterhof Palace.


And for the modern visitor, the Hampton Court images – more than 60 of which 
are on show at the exhibition – give a fascinating visual insight into 18th
-century life at the palace.


From a historical point of view, Spyers’ images make diverting viewing. They 
range from neatly observed views of the famous Base Court and Clock Court, to 
scenes of lesser known courtyards and passageways – populated by everyone from 
courtiers and “grace and favour” residents to guards, coachmen and servants.


And although the images betray the slightly restrained style of a man trained 
as a surveyor rather than an artist, they also show Spyers’ individuality – 
particularly when it comes to representations of people.


“He’s got a strange way of drawing people,” says exhibition curator Sebastian 
Edwards. “They’re quite long and thin – you can tell he’s not a trained artist 
– but there’s a charm to them, and they’re wonderfully observed.”


Browsing through the collection on a visit to Hampton Court, it’s possible to 
spot buildings that do not stand today. “As you approach the palace,” says 
Edwards, “there is a range of Tudor ‘offices’, the dirty and smelly parts of 
the palace where they slaughtered animals – all that was swept away in the 19th 
century.”


And you can see how the palace courtyards changed over time before the 
Victorians restored the palace, replacing Tudor-style barley twist chimneys and 
battlements.

“All of that is Victorian restoration,” says Edwards. “You can see [in Spyers’ 
drawings] that it’s all a bit higgledy-piggledy and run-down. George III 
rejected the palace, so there was no pressure to modernise.”


Adding to the sense of travelling back in time, the exhibition includes modern 
photos taken from the same spots that Spyers made his drawings – so it’s easy 
to compare and contrast across 250 years.


“It was great fun doing those,” says Edwards. “It was nice to put yourself in 
Spyers’ position, in exactly the same spot – and sometimes hard to do, because 
he has manipulated the drawing to get the effects he wants. In one strange one, 
he’s put the sun in the north.”


A drawing of the west front of the palace – still the main entrance today – 
shows a horse-drawn coach arriving, perhaps dropping off visitors from London.


“We have images of quite fashionable aristocratic families visiting,” says 
Edwards. “They’d pay a shilling to the housekeeper, who pocketed all the money.”


As well as the Hampton Court drawings, says Edwards, Spyers also sold a second 
folio containing views of landscapes, designs for garden features, and 
fashionable 18th-century features such as Gothic ruins.


“This was the bread-and-butter work that Spyers did in his day job,” explains 
Edwards. “It looks as if he threw them all together in an opportunistic moment 
to sell to the Russian empress.”


And what did Spyers do with the 1,000 roubles he got from selling the 
drawings? “It works out at about £200 at the time – and that would have been a 
good salary for a number of years for someone of Spyers’ background,” Edwards 
says.


“It probably helped him retire from working with Brown. He ends up in quite a 
smart house in Twickenham and becomes a gentleman artist.”


The Empress and the Gardener 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/clk/304155071;133262059;s> is now open and runs 
till 4 September 2016.Admission is included as part of a Palace, Maze and 
Gardens ticket at Hampton Court Palace
