
The evening before we're off to Cornwall I realise we don't have enough room 
in the car. We have a people carrier with seven seats (one for everyone) but a 
teeny boot. I can beg everyone to pack as little as possible but baby Flora 
will still need her pushchair, the endless changes of baby clothes, the 
humidifier because she has a nasty cough and the travel cot. Over a year ago, 
before we knew a baby was on the way and we were planning life after my 
menopause, J and I talked about downsizing our car to one we could park. Now we 
need to find our roof box, which was last seen being colonised by snails in the 
garden.

A trip to Cornwall is on my list of things to do before I get to 50. I haven't 
been there since I was 10 years old.

"Holidays as a child are the things you remember," a friend said to me last 
week. I remember eating fish and chips in St Ives and walking round the town 
with my father trying to find the cheapest B&B. I also remember the fat 
seagulls and the cliff walks and in my memories it is sunny.

"You'll love Cornwall," I tell Tilly and Lydia.

"Is it abroad?" asks Lydia.

"No, but it has lovely ice-cream."

A neighbour warns me that we should leave at 6am to avoid the infamous traffic 
jam past Exeter.

I start worrying about Flora. I want to drive as far as possible while she's 
still asleep.

"We're leaving at 5am," I say and wait for the uproar. There isn't any uproar, 
which makes me suspicious they haven't heard, so I say it again.

"Sure, Mum, I'll be up. No problem," says Sam, my 21-year-old, who is 
currently unemployed and often doesn't go to bed before 5am.

"I would rather you didn't take your laptop," I say, waiting for the outburst.

But Sam is more than reasonable.

"No that's fine. The holiday's for family time, it'll be nice," he says.

"Do you think you can bear not to be on Facebook for seven days?" I ask.

"Well, to be honest, although I say I'm on Facebook, I'm really internet 
gambling," he says, cheerfully.

Everyone manages to get up at 4.30am, although Lydia, who's eight, lies on her 
bed for 20 minutes begging everyone to go to Cornwall without her.

"My legs are too weak – I can't get up. Really."

At 5.20am we set off, having crammed everything on top of everyone in the car. 
Flora has been given an early feed and gone back to sleep. I'm doing the first 
leg of the drive (two and a half hours) and have drunk two cups of coffee. Five 
minutes down the motorway we all hear a loud, shrill whistling from the roof of 
the car. It's quite musical, with a higher pitch at 70mph, dipping to a lower 
note at 65mph, before fading to an intermittent wail at 60mph. If we change 
speed quickly enough it sounds like a screaming police siren.

"What is that horrible noise?" asks J.

It can only be the roof box, or the bars it rests on, whistling in the wind. 
We roll down the window and the noise is even louder outside. We must be 
deafening car loads of passing drivers.

When it starts raining, it officially becomes the worst family holiday drive 
ever. I'm amazed the children don't complain more, but even Flora is kind 
enough to stay asleep. We arrive at our holiday complex and unpack by our 
wooden lodge. The sky is grey and heavy with more rain. There is a smell of 
damp drizzle. J pulls out a sunshade for Flora's pushchair. He grins bleakly. 
"We could have saved some room by not bringing this," he says.
