
The best advice anyone ever gave me about writing, and something I try and 
pass on to anyone who's interested, is that the most important key on the 
keyboard is the delete key. It's through removing the dross that quality comes 
out. It's in creating space that the reader is given the chance to use their 
own imagination. It's in the paring down and the brutal editing that a 
manuscript takes shape. I'm slowly realising that the same rule applies in 
woodland management. Until recently I used to think that all trees were there 
to be revered and admired, rather like elderly relatives. Whereas actually many 
trees are like bad sentences needing a firm red pen.

Since the entirety of our little woodland came about through natural 
regeneration, it's a dense, dark place. Many trees are growing only a few 
centimetres apart; sometimes they're even growing out of the same spot, one on 
top of the other. The paths are narrow and you often have to duck to avoid 
being scratched by overhanging hawthorns or blackthorns. And there's one tree 
that dominates and darkens much of the wood, a fairly useless thing called Goat 
Willow (Salix caprea).

In its defence, Goat Willow provides an early source of nectar for the bees; 
it also provides "witch's aspirin", since its bark apparently contains 
salicylic acid (from salix), the source of "real" aspirin. In the old days, 
girls who didn't wear a sprig of Goat Willow on Palm Sunday would have their 
hair pulled. But beyond those attributes, it's only useful as a pioneer 
species. It establishes everywhere and sends up huge, divergent stems that 
knock over other, smaller trees.

Jonathan, a friend staying with us, and I get into our Kevlar overalls, fuel 
up the chainsaws and get to work. Part of the difficulty of thinning in dense 
woods is that trees are likely to get "hung up", meaning they don't fall to the 
ground but get snagged in other trees. So we slowly clear an area to the east, 
creating a open space into which we can knock over the willows.

Felling is never as easy as it sounds and is, obviously, a potentially lethal 
activity. Basically you cut away low branches and remove the buttresses from 
the bottom of the trunk. You look up at the tree and decide which direction to 
fell it according to the lean, the weighting in the crown and the surrounding 
conditions. The first cut is the sink cut, a thick wedge taken out of the front 
of the tree; the back (or felling) cut is slightly higher so that the falling 
tree can't jump back at you. Those two cuts create a "hinge" in the middle of 
the trunk on which the tree then, hopefully, "folds" and falls in the intended 
direction as you retreat. This is a ridiculously short summary of a complicated 
art: don't try it without the proper training.

Our 10 minutes of felling lead to two hours of laborious tidying: 
cross-cutting the large trunks into 4ft lengths and stacking them in piles 
which are held off the ground by two perpendicular logs and kept in place by 
hazel rods, front and back. We weave the smaller branches into a kind of dead 
hedge along the path.

After lunch we do more of the same: taking out more goat willow and the odd 
ash, sycamore, hawthorn and hazel. I still have a twinge of regret about 
felling, but am consoled by the fact that almost all the trees will coppice 
vigorously, meaning their deep roots will create dozens of new shoots from the 
old stumps.

And after two days' work the difference is incredible. I know of no other 
activity that so quickly changes a landscape. We've created a glade. Suddenly 
the autumn sunlight is streaming in. Birds are already making it their home. We 
can see, for the first time, dozens of strong saplings which know that their 
turn has come. And the trees we have left in place suddenly look more majestic. 
In years to come they will have the necessary space and light to put on girth. 
We can, in this one small spot, finally see the wood for the trees.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk  
<http://windsorhillwood.co.uk>
