
The best broccoli I've had recently was served at Fergus Henderson's 
restaurant, St John Bread and Wine - purple sprouting broccoli, steamed and 
drizzled in a shallot vinaigrette. Simple, but delicious. You really feel like 
you're getting your five a day there. Pan-fried with garlic and chilli oil also 
works a treat. Or try it as a light tempura.

Cabbage is distinctive enough to take other powerful components. I love it 
with bacon and shallots, or mixed with diced carrots, celeriac and double cream 
it makes a perfect accompaniment to game. Likewise, sprouts are bold and 
distinctive. Toss them with white wine, pancetta and cream. Don't overlook 
sprout tops; they are more subtle than sprouts themselves and require little 
preparation. Toss in at the end of your dish for a green flourish.

Cauliflower cheese is great, but it's got to be done properly. Anything too 
watery just doesn't work, so allow your florets to drain thoroughly. I like my 
cauliflower pickled. It works well in piccalilli, served as an antipasti. 
Again, it's a bold flavour, so great in soups. Serve with a wedge of bread and 
a chunk of stilton or steamed and sprinkled with roasted chestnuts.

Kale is a true "superfood" packed full of potassium. I treat kale like 
sprouting broccoli and cabbage by cooking it rapidly with chilli oil and 
garlic. If you like spinach but want something with a bit more bite, kale is 
your answer.

Kohlrabi is an odd-looking vegetable and I find it doesn't have much flavour. 
For that reason, it can take a lot of spices and will work well with Chinese 
and Thai. I find turnip works well as paper-thin raw disks marinated in vinegar 
with fresh tuna.

Pak choi is the classic Chinese leaf. It has its own flavour, but can take on 
the stronger flavours of soy and ginger. It's a vivid green, so don't overcook 
or it'll lose its vibrancy. Swede is very underrated and is actually more 
versatile than you think. I serve mine grated, lightly sauteed, then baked with 
a dollop of double cream and breadcrumbs. Perfect Sunday afternoon comfort food.
