
If capitalism isn’t good, that’s no accident. Capitalism is not about doing 
good but making money from human or other resources (“Capitalism’s claim to do 
good looks shaky if there’s little to prevent it being a force for bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/12/bhs-philip-green-parliamentary-committee-safeguards>
”, Business). It’s the core of capitalism, not just the culture that needs to 
change. Parliamentary democracy has bypassed or incorporated old pyramids of 
wealth and power. Unreformed career ladders of promotion, reward and authority 
span private and public sectors – finance, industry, media and education, 
political parties and government.

To counter this convergence of wealth and power requires more than strong 
unions. What working people need is their own voice in the direction, 
management and reward of companies and industries that depend on them.
Greg Wilkinson
Swansea

GM crops yield no benefits

The central pillars of your editorial on genetically modified crops – that 
there is consensus over the safety of GM and that such a consensus would mean 
the arguments were over – are flawed. (“Europe can no longer turn its back on 
the benefits of genetically modified crops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/22/observer-view-on-genetically-modified-gm-crops>
”).

There is nothing like the level of scientific consensus over genetically 
modified organisms as there is on climate change. Rather than giving GMOs a 
clean bill of health, the US National Academy of Sciences reveals that there is 
still a lot that we don’t know. And hundreds of scientists worldwide have 
signed a document refuting this “consensus”. Commercial GM farming has caused 
what the report identified as “major agricultural problems”.

GM crops have failed to provide any obvious benefits for the environment or 
the millions of small farmers who produce the majority of the world’s food. As 
the NAS report confirms, they don’t increase crop yields. So the real question 
is: why do we continue to pursue this now outdated technology, when there are 
more innovative, fairer and greener ways of producing our food?
Clare Oxborrow Friends of the Earth
Vicki Hird War on Want
Liz O’Neill GM Freeze
Peter Melchett Soil Association

Give state pupils a leg-up

Neil Wigglesworth 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/jun/11/letters-britain-foreign-aid-budget>
 (Letters) is right: none of the major parties appears at present to have the 
political will to abolish private schools as a first step in dismantling a 
system that allows a tiny section of society to commandeer a vastly 
disproportionate share of opportunity, wealth and influence. An alternative 
approach would be to require all oversubscribed universities to allocate 93% of 
their places to state school pupils. This measure, together with the 
implementation of a ballot system to allocate places in popular state schools, 
would blow a hole in the ability of the rich to buy advantages for their 
children.
Jane Duffield-Bish
Norwich

Don’t go over the top

In his comments on a photograph taken at the Battle of the Somme (The Big 
Picture 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/jun/12/scenes-from-the-somme-european-war-centenary-photography>
, New Review), Peter Conrad is surely letting his imagination run riot. The 
zeppelins he mentions played no part in the battle. The trench the Welsh Guards 
are occupying is certainly a trench rather than “a gash left behind by a shell” 
– the dugouts are clearly visible and in the correct alignment, facing away 
from no-man’s-land. The soldier in the foreground is probably not dead, as he 
seems to be smoking a cigarette. The “grey, hovering cloud” is probably caused 
by a pot of tea on the boil and those “abandoned knapsacks”, like the rifles on 
the parapet, are in good order. It’s insulting to the men to read into their 
expressions the “shell shock” that Mr Conrad believes must be there. 

Given the huge numbers of truly shocking photographs from the First World War, 
there is surely no need to resort to this kind of hyperbole.  
Dale Scarboro
Cheltenham

Lay off the granny-bashing

I hope that there are other grandparents out there who will be writing to you 
regardingDear Mariella 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/12/should-i-let-my-children-see-their-grandmother-mariella-frostrup>
 (Magazine), as I am too busy looking after my two young grandchildren for 
30-plus hours a week, without recourse to “inappropriate TV shows… and 
prohibited biscuits”, to explain why this denigrating and old-fashioned 
stereotype of self-indulgent, parent-undermining, child-spoiling grandparenting 
that Mariella Frostrup portrays so poorly reflects the role of so many 
grandparents. 
Eleanor Cohn
Bridgnorth
Shropshire

Long live Dave and his milk ilk

Alex Clark wrote (“The delivery man always rings twice... if you’re lucky 
<http:>”, Comment): “Rumour has it that there are still some of these ‘milkmen’ 
left… But it surely can’t be true.” Dave has delivered milk, orange juice and 
eggs to me for more than 20 years. In autumn, he brings a bag of bark to cover 
the dahlias, takes it round to the back, ensuring that the gate is closed to 
prevent the tortoise going walkabout. Then there is the occasional chat or a 
wave from the van, an eye kept when I am away. You can’t have that from Amazon 
Fresh. Why would I wish to stop this because milk is cheaper (but heavier) at 
the supermarket? It can be true, Alex.
Joan Purkiss
Beverley
East Yorkshire
