
I have been on a bus with T three times: the first, he was about four weeks 
old, I still had my huge, unmanoeuvrable buggy, and the driver closed the doors 
on him, with me on the pavement screaming like I'd had one of my legs chopped 
off. He opened the doors sighing, as if to say, "Madam, I have let you and half 
of your baby out, what do you want, blood?", and a six-year-old at the bus stop 
took his number down for me so I could complain. I felt justified in all the 
yelling then, since if this perfectly reasonable six-year-old could see he was 
in the wrong, it was open-and-shut. So I gave the kid a quid. In retrospect, I 
don't think he'd even seen what happened, he was just being entrepreneurial.

The second time, I had T and his cousin D, and a double espresso. I have told 
you this story before, I know - to recap: nobody got splashed, but it was quite 
stressful. The third time, the bus was very full, and through some vaguery of 
the fullness, and where I was sitting, and the bus's topography, I and another 
woman ended up effectively swapping children because we couldn't reach our own. 
Which was OK for me, hers was asleep. Imagine how annoying that is, to have 20 
full minutes that you could potentially spend luxuriously staring out of the 
window, and to have to spend it instead donning a jaunty voice to tell a 
strange baby not to throw his mittens.

Mainly, I go by train. Or I go to places that are quite near. Oh, this is 
pathetic. I'm trying to pretend that I don't drive much, when that is what I 
almost always do.

None of which brings me very neatly to the Lothian question, but I have at 
least raised the theme of buses. (You will be familiar with the West Lothian 
question, of course. It is a fascinating one about whether or not Scottish MPs 
should be allowed to vote on English matters. The Lothian question is a fight 
over who is more right, between mothers and disabled people.) A reader from 
Edinburgh emailed me with this story in August, but I had pressing matters to 
cover, such as T's first frankfurter, and I assumed the bus company would see 
sense in about 20 seconds, so I ignored it. Three months later, it rages on: 
Lothian Buses has banned from its vehicles buggies that don't fold up. It's a 
stupid rule, because even when buggies do fold up, if you have a baby and a 
toddler, or a load of shopping, you can't fold them anyway. So it's really all 
buggies. That space, apparently, is for disabled people, so parents should 
either fold their buggies up or get off, and according to their research, some 
parents won't. A word on that research - they have been cagey about their 
statistical sample. Many suspect that it's only about eight people. And some 
others are filing it under "stuff the bus company has made up".

There's been a petition, and one particularly vocal MSP, Shirley-Anne 
Somerville, has stepped up in support of parents - but, say bus-defenders 
triumphantly, she has a young child herself! So, obviously, she is talking 
bollocks. This is a typical comment on the Edinburgh Evening News thread: "He 
[a disabled person] can't help having a disability, whereas young mums have the 
option of walking with the pram, but some would class that as hard work!" Which 
is a good point, but why stop at mothers? Why can't everybody walk? Why even 
have buses?

The weird thing is, nobody in either camp disagrees on the point that disabled 
people should always take priority on the wheelchair space: they're really 
fighting the inflexibility of the bus company, and the way it needlessly 
isolates parents. But I do disagree. A baby is no different from any other 
person who can't walk. The fact that it will learn to walk one day is 
immaterial. At the moment, it can't, so any facilities designed for people who 
can't walk should be accessible to and intended for the small ones as well as 
the fully sized ones. I often get the sense that people feel really vexed by 
prams and buggies, as if they were just large unwieldy handbags that mothers, 
with their excessive self-involvement, like to inflict upon the rest of the 
world. A better way to look at it is that a person who can't walk is in a chair 
that has wheels. A little bit like a wheelchair.
