
Licked by cold winds on its exposed north and east sides, and sited in a frost 
pocket, the Winter Garden at RHS Rosemoor belies Devon's reputation for a mild 
climate. The garden's aspect dictated the planting layout. Being open on the 
east means there is the benefit of early morning sunshine, which makes flowers 
and coloured stems shine, but early camellias and magnolias had to be planted 
in the protection of trees on the south and west edges to avoid frost damage to 
their delicate flowers.

Conifers and heathers, enormously tough, sit on the northern edge, enjoying 
the sun to the full. Scented plants including Daphne bholua 'Jacqueline 
Postill' and sarcococca have been planted near paths so their smell can be 
appreciated; they are also sheltered by other plants, so the perfume doesn't 
drift away on the breeze.

Assuming you don't have Rosemoor's 65 acres, then winter gardens are not just 
for winter, so select plants that offer more than a one-season wonder. Prunus 
are a good choice here because they have blossom, then fruit, and in some cases 
interesting bark, too (Prunus serrula is ideal for small gardens); dogwoods 
look decent in summer when their variegated leaves burst from the coloured 
stems that make them such a feature in winter (rhs.org.uk 
<http://www.rhs.org.uk>). 

Salix alba var. vitellina 'Britzensis' is really a tree, but annual coppicing 
keeps the size manageable and the stems bright, making a stunning contrast with 
the white Himalayan birch

Conifers and heathers are not considered the height of cool, yet are essential 
in the winter garden, adding colour and structure. The addition of carex and 
other grasses makes things more modern

Cornus sanguinea 'Winter Beauty' is cut back to a low framework of branches 
each March

Dark, evergreen trees and shrubs provide shelter, and the contrasting backdrop 
helps smaller and more colourful subjects to stand out

Many varieties of erica prefer acid soil, but some will tolerate alkaline 
conditions. Different varieties can extend the flowering season for most of the 
year
