
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> is to appear 
alongside the new Labour mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, at the launch of a 
Britain Stronger in Europe battlebus on Monday, in an unusual act of 
reconciliation intended to underline the strong cross-party support for remain.
Brexit explained: voting by post or proxy 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?sheet=intermediate&id=post_proxy&format=expandable>
The two men will also launch a five-point remain pledge card highlighting 
benefits from EU membership that they say will be protected if Britain votes to 
remain in the EU.

Khan was elected despite Cameron repeatedly using prime minister’s questions 
to highlight Tory claims that he was too close to extremists – tactics widely 
condemned by senior Conservatives as unpleasant, counterproductive and racially 
offensive.

But on Sunday, Khan said this would not stop him from appearing alongside the 
Conservative leader because making the case for continuing EU membership was so 
important.

Speaking on ITV’s Peston on Sunday, Khan said: “Is it in London’s interest for 
me to hold grudges? Is it in London’s interests for the mayor of London to be 
at permanent war with the Conservative prime minister?

“We’re never going to be best friends, but what is important is that the mayor 
of London argues the case for London and for Londoners to remain in theEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. This debate is far more important 
than David Cameron or me. It’s about our city’s future and country’s future.”

Cameron and Khan will unveil a pledge card that will be be distributed around 
the country in the name of Britain Stronger in Europe, which lists five things 
that will be guaranteed in the event of Britain voting to remain in the EU.

The five promises are: full access to the EU’s single market; workers’ rights 
protected; keeping the European arrest warrant; a special status for the UK in 
Europe; and economic stability.

Cameron will say: “These guarantees – from safeguarding our economy to 
protecting our security – show the positive case for remaining inside the EU. 
Whenever Leave campaigners are asked what Britain will look like outside the 
EU, all they can say is: ‘we just don’t know’.

Cameron has already attended pro-EU campaign events with Harriet Harman, the 
former Labour deputy leader, and Tessa Jowell, the former Labour culture 
secretary, but a joint appearance with Khan – arguably the most powerful Labour 
politician in the UK – is an important coup. Labour supporters are much more 
inclined to vote to stay than Conservative supporters, and the remain campaign 
knows it has to mobilise the Labour vote if it wants to win on 23 June.


Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, and Alan Johnson, chair of Labour In for 
Britain, have ruled out sharing a platform with Cameron, mindful that Labour’s 
decision to campaign alongside the Tories in the Scottish independence 
referendum was subsequently cited as one reason why its vote collapsed in the 
2015 general election.

But Khan, whose links with Corbyn were highlighted prominently in Tory 
election leaflets during the mayoral campaign, is anxious to differentiate 
himself from his party leader, and a joint appearance with Cameron will boost 
his standing as a pluralist willing to work with a range of people in London’s 
interests.

In his Peston interview, Khan was also surprisingly positive about George 
Osborne, the chancellor, whom he has met since the mayoral election.

“[Osborne] understands why it’s in the country’s interests for London to do 
well,” Khan said. “He cares about devolving power away from Whitehall, and to 
give him credit he’s given more power to SNP Scotland, more power to Labour 
Wales, more power to a Labour Greater Manchester, and I believe genuinely he’ll 
give more power to London as well.”

In a separate development on Sunday, Vote Leave claimed that leaving the EU 
would enable a UK government to tackle the problem posed by wealthy foreign 
investors buying up London property and leaving it empty.

Citing figures highlighted by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/revealed-9-rise-in-london-properties-owned-by-offshore-firms>
 showing that almost 100,000 properties in England and Wales are owned by 
offshore companies, a Vote Leave briefing said European court of justice 
rulings stop EU member states imposing residence requirements on property 
ownership on the grounds that this would amount to interference with the 
principle of free movement of capital.

Michael Gove <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, the pro-Brexit 
justice secretary, said: “At the moment we are powerless to stop offshore 
companies buying property in the UK because of EU rules. This drives up the 
cost of housing, which is fast becoming unaffordable for all but the super-rich.

“If we vote leave and take back control we would be able to introduce curbs 
that would help British families to get on the housing ladder.”
