
"My life would be worse without it," … "I can't begin to calculate the 
positive influence a place like this has had on mine and many people's lives," 
… "It gave me an opportunity I could never have hoped for otherwise."

Among the more than 2,000 signatures to a petition against proposed 
redundancies at the London adult education college City Lit are story after 
story of lives changed and second chances given. There are more on the YouTube 
clips of students attending rallies against the redundancies in June and again 
last Tuesday (6 July). The college seems to inspire a passion beyond the usual 
measures of student satisfaction.

"For me it has been amazing," says Esme Duggleby, a former nanny who, after 
leaving school with four GCSEs 10 years ago, has just completed an access to 
humanities and social studies course at the college and is going to Goldsmiths 
to study for a BA in education, culture and society. She says City Lit 
diagnosed her dyslexia on her first day and after that, with "phenomenal 
teaching and support", she achieved more than she ever thought possible. "They 
taught me how I learn," she says.

But the course she attended will no longer be available. The college, which 
was founded in 1919 to provide affordable education to the people of London and 
is now the largest adult education centre in Europe, issued redundancy notices 
last month for 73 posts, affecting 66 employees. Worst hit was the Fresh 
Horizons university access and English and maths GCSE programme. The entire 
programme orginally faced closure but has been rescued in part following a 
consultation, and most GCSEs and all evening classes will now continue. The 
principal, Mark Malcomson, says it was felt particularly important to continue 
these classes because there was little alternative evening provision in London.

But the access programme will be severely diminished, and the course Duggleby 
followed is not taking enrolments. Jobs are also going from learning support 
and the counselling service, which, protesters argue, will affect the most 
vulnerable learners.

Also badly affected is deaf education, a flagship area of expertise for City 
Lit, which is the biggest centre for deaf education in Europe. While Malcomson 
insists that courses for deaf learners will be untouched, courses for 
professionals supporting deaf people, including notetakers, will go.

A senior source at City Lit blames the government for cutting support for deaf 
students, which has forced the college to find savings to top up the shortfall. 
"The government doesn't recognise the need to fund adult education, but cutting 
this funding is going to directly affect the number of people out of work so 
it's very shortsighted of them," says the source, adding that even though 
courses for deaf adults will continue, the quality of provision is likely to be 
affected because of cutting staff in co-ordinator roles. "We got outstanding in 
our last inspection. How are we going to maintain that outstanding education 
with fewer staff?"

Protesters are angry that the redundancies follow an expensive marketing 
campaign by the college and an increase in the number of short courses it 
offers. Duggleby, who is particularly incensed by the continuing availability 
of graffiti crosstitch when access courses are closing, describes them as 
"short hobby courses for middle-class retirees".

But Malcomson, who was appointed last year from the London Business School, 
says expanding these kinds of courses is an essential part of securing the 
college's future. Managers at the college say government funding cuts, combined 
with extra pension and national insurance costs, will amount to £1.7m a year 
less for the college by 2015.

"As funding is reduced and costs go up we are doing everything we can to 
ensure our social and community provision continues," says Malcomson. "One way 
to do that is to run more classes popular with the people who pay full price, 
and that money is then reallocated."

Access provision is particularly expensive because it is so labour intensive, 
he says. The college has also had problems recruiting students to some access 
courses because the kinds of students these courses serve are reluctant to take 
on high tuition fee loans.

He says part of the reason the college has been spending on marketing is to 
attract more fee-paying students to help subsidise "more charitable provision" 
over the long term. Fees at the college are increasing by 7% on average. "Our 
prime ethos is to encourage adult education at all levels in London," he says.

Staff say they support the diversity of the college, which now has 30,000 
adult learners and has attracted high-profile names including authors Malorie 
Blackman and Andrea Levy on to its short courses. But some are concerned that 
the balance is shifting away from the people who most need the education it 
provides.

The University and College Union has passed a vote of no confidence in the 
principal and organised a letter-writing campaign among former students asking 
the governing body to rethink the redundancies. A UCU spokesman argues that 
government cuts have been on the cards for a long time and managers should have 
anticipated them better. "We have to spend what money we have wisely and pay 
attention to what our core business is. We feel the priorities are wrong and 
that an awful lot of money is being spent on short courses in beer-tasting and 
burlesque whereas the core programme is being reduced. City Lit is in danger of 
becoming more like a leisure facility than a serious institution if we carry on 
like this."

Among former students "devastated" by that prospect is Lewis Pogson, who has 
just completed his second year at Brighton University after studying on a Fresh 
Horizons access to humanities and social sciences course in 2012. He said he 
was "gutted" that his course was closing.

He left school at 14 with no formal qualifications and a feeling that "there 
was a gulf between me and education". After spending time in prison, he felt on 
his release that he had little prospect of finding employment. "From my 
personal circumstances there was little on offer for me," he says. "I had few 
options to do something productive with my life and this programme supported me 
and let me excel." He is now considering postgraduate study.
