
You weren’t there as I watched the tears flow from my partner’s face when our 
son was diagnosed as severely autistic and we were informed he would never 
whisper our names, say I love you or even proffer a kiss. You are never there 
when our son wakes up every hour on the hour struggling to sleep because of his 
melatonin levels or when he has a meltdown and needs skin-to-skin contact to 
soothe his woes.

Given that you know so little about us it seems strange that you – and people 
like you – are always there whenever we leave the house. The sideways glances 
at the supermarket, a muted tut when our son squeals at a restaurant or a 
dissecting stare while we play at the park. We were told that finding out you 
have a severely disabled child is akin to a family bereavement and despite our 
best efforts we die a little inside every time you focus your judgmental gaze.

As our son gets older and the differences between him and his neurotypical 
peers becomes more evident, the stares have become more pronounced, the tuts 
get louder and the whispered comments more pointed. Yes, we know our son is 
different and we’d be happy to explain those differences if you took a step out 
of the shadows and said hello. We love our son and spend the majority of our 
time trying to unlock the puzzle that is his needs. Every trip we take out is a 
little victory of planning, preparation, perspiration or even 
sheer determination.

Sometimes when I see the hurt on my partner’s face, I steel myself to confront 
people like you

Sometimes when I see the hurt on my partner’s face, I steel myself to confront 
people like you – but how do I address someone who thinks my child is a figure 
of fun to be objectified, categorised and pilloried with a disapproving nod? 
How do I ask you to stop your son from mimicking the noises my child makes 
while you casually label him as “special”, “different” or “naughty”? I often 
stand bewildered waiting for an apology that never comes wondering if I have 
much more tongue left to bite.

If you’d asked about the noises he makes I could tell you how my heart soared 
the first time my son uttered some loosely collected sounds that resembled the 
word Dad. Or how we use pictures and a limited vocabulary to aid his 
understanding, constantly repeating words and phrases in the hope that some 
language will stick.

I might also explain how although he can’t communicate to us verbally, the 
sideways glances, the loud echoing of sounds and running around are all signs 
that he is happy and his senses are being stimulated by the surrounding 
environment.

We know that you don’t know about the missed family events, non-existent 
holidays, the birthday party invitations that never arrive or the constant 
sleep deprivation that having a severely autistic child entails, but you do now.

Please don’t stare. Join in with us or leave us alone to enjoy our son. We 
feel we’ve earned it.

George’s dad
