
Our recent report, The chief executive’s tale 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/publications/nhs-chief-executive-interviews>, 
paints a picture of a pernicious national environment where talented NHS 
leaders are leaving because the culture in which they work is anything but 
positive. The creation of a positive organisational culture that promotes 
innovation and quality has to have compassion as a central value and belief.


While we expect compassion from frontline NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff, they are not always well 
served by compassionate leadership in their organisation or from national 
bodies.


It’s easy to think that health is delivered by one NHS, but of course it 
isn’t. It’s a complex federation of disparate organisations under the banner of 
one of the most instantly recognised brands in the world. The psychological 
contract patients have with the NHS has been built up over years, based on 
experience, expectation and promises that shape what they should and can demand.


As long as the single brand exists, the national bodies responsible for its 
strategic development should consider the unifying forces that constitute one 
NHS. The expectation of outstanding compassionate clinical care at the point of 
delivery is one of the givens. And it’s right to say that across the system 
patients do receive amazing care day in, day out – delivered with compassion.


Related: Back-office staff have a role to play in improving NHS care too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/24/back-office-staff-improving-nhs-care>

In the absence of compassion, however, the quality of care falls and terrible 
situations like those experienced by patients in Mid Staffs can occur. We know 
one of the contributory factors when this happens is a failing of leadership, 
one that shows compassion.


The bullying from the government, regulators and the media identified in our 
report, along with financial constraints and demand for services, can diminish 
compassion in the system. The bullied eventually become the bullies and as a 
result patient safety and care is affected. That’s not to say that performance 
targets shouldn’t be set with the expectation that they will be met. But an 
environment of cooperation and support that acknowledges what’s working well as 
well as what’s not is one where sustained quality improvement becomes the norm 
across the NHS.


People feel safest when they are surrounded by understanding and compassion. 
The reality of effective leaders is that among their ability to be resilient, 
strong, decisive and results driven, they also have the conviction, confidence 
and courage to cultivate connectivity and compassion in their organisation.


People can’t focus and do good work if they are surrounded by negative 
emotions. If leaders want people to take committed action and put in a superior 
performance, they have to connect with their feelings first – and connectivity 
is compassion in action.


The changes required to deliver a health system that’s fit for the future are 
far-reaching. Integrated services that go across traditional organisational 
boundaries are necessary and a new settlement with patients on what they can 
expect is emerging. But as global healthcare expert Don Berwick says: “Culture 
change and continual improvement come from what leaders do, through their 
commitment, encouragement, compassion and modelling of appropriate behaviours.”


It’s easy to think that in a money-starved environment, where the popular 
discourse is about failure rather than achievement, we can’t make space for 
compassion. But I would argue that the opposite is true. Great leaders care 
about connecting with those they lead. They see connectivity as the conduit for 
almost everything else they do and compassion is the key. Compassionate leaders 
inspire people with purpose, hope, optimism and energy because they resonate, 
empathise and connect.


Bullying, directive, coercive styles may move people in the short term, but 
the dissonance it ignites breeds toxic emotions such as anger, anxiety or 
apathy, and does long-term damage to morale.


The NHS is anxious about its ability to deliver and therefore about its 
long-term viability.NHS Improvement <https://improvement.nhs.uk/> is developing 
a leadership strategy for the health service. The King’s Fund has made a 
submission to this work and we are being consulted on it.


This strategy is an essential element in providing a unifying force that 
informs the leadership we need, the behaviour we can expect and therefore the 
care that can be delivered across the system.


At the heart of it are values, one of which should be compassion – not just in 
delivery but in leadership. Only when you get this resonance across the health 
landscape will you get the transformation that’s so urgently required.


Marcus Powell is director of leadership and organisational development at the 
King’s Fund. He will be joining Jeremy Hunt and other speakers at Wednesday’s
leadership and management summit 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/events/sixth-annual-leadership-and-management-summit>
. Follow the debates on Twitter via hashtag#kflead 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/kflead?src=hash>


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
