
A couple of years ago, my colleagues and I conducted a study on 
decision-making in university partnerships. Our findings suggested that good 
university partnerships did not depend on rational management decisions so much 
as human emotion.

Alongside Daphne Lipp and Philipp Höllermann, I looked at the reasons for 
selecting a partner university 
<http://www.che.de/downloads/laws_of_attraction.pdf> as well as the factors 
involved in partnerships that failed or were successful. Our feeling was that a 
university’s management often claims to use purely rational methods in the 
selection of partner universities, as well as in keeping such partnerships 
running smoothly. Ultimately though, emotional factors can be extremely 
important, and they are not prioritised.

The results of our study were clear. International 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/international> 
collaborations were largely initiated on the basis of positive impressions, 
observed from a distance. Instead of recommendations, personal links or 
locations playing a significant part, institutions and study programmes with 
good reputations received far more attention from potential partner 
universities.

Only after a partnership was established did this change. Suddenly, other 
factors defined whether a partnership was considered successful. Communication 
and personal links both on an academic and administrative level were crucial 
factors in 94.6% of successful and 74.3% of unsuccessful partnerships. As well 
as this, experience based on trust mattered, as did comparability (we do 
similar things) and compatibility (what you do adds to what I do).

The more similar study programmes and shared goals were and the more 
experience each institution had with each other, the better the chances for a 
long-lasting and successful collaboration or partnership. Finally, similar 
goals for the future were important in successful partnerships.

Doesn’t this sound familiar? Don’t the same criteria also apply to human 
relationships? It seems that the relations between universities are quite 
similar to romantic alliances of individuals, based on emotions and influenced 
by emotion-based decisions to a much greater degree than many might assume.

So should we approach collaborations between universities as individuals 
approach relationships? Individuals already act as agents on behalf of 
institutions to foster partnerships, after all. Perhaps we should go a step 
further and be more explicit about the human part of process of building 
partnerships between these elaborate institutions: likes and dislikes, 
attractions, emotions and feelings.

So, what does this mean? Should collaboration meetings be held over romantic 
candlelit dinners? Should joint study programmes be announced as though they 
are birth announcements? Should international offices celebrate collaboration 
anniversaries with a mini-break to Paris?


University relations are – or should be – based on the improvement of study 
programmes, on new research groups or economies of scale. Yet, ultimately, 
international university collaborations are influenced by emotions at different 
levels within administration and faculties.

It may therefore be prudent to give intuition and emotions due consideration 
when developing internationalisation strategies. Bringing together individuals 
from both institutions and fostering communication and a good working climate 
are basics for developing interest in the partner. While administrative staff 
appear to have limited influence in initiating partnerships, they play a 
crucial role in day-to-day cooperation. Establishing closer links on this level 
might have the most substantial effect in the long run.

More importantly, if we look at our university partnerships the same way we 
look at relationships in our private lives, it may be easier to identify what 
we want and what we need. Are we looking for a one-night stand (a single joint 
application for a grant), a fling (regular joint projects), or a marriage (key 
partners)? Each type of relationship between humans needs communication, 
recognition of different degrees of experience, trust, and comparability as 
well as compatibility.

The more stable the partnership is considered to be, the more similar future 
goals become important. Who says a one-night stand cannot turn into a 
long-lasting partnership? And who would propose marriage on the first date? 
Moreover, human relationships between individuals from different cultures have 
to cope with different conventions of what is proper. It helps us tremendously 
to use our experiences in our personal lives to influence our professional 
lives, and aid the process of international partnership.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
