
Nations should remove laws that prevent women from working in order to 
increase the female labour supply and boost their economies, IMF Managing 
Director Christine Lagarde has said.

“In too many countries, too many legal restrictions conspire against women to 
be economically active,” Lagarde wrote in a blog. “In a world in search of 
growth, women will help find it, if they face a level playing field instead of 
an insidious conspiracy.”

Lagarde, the first woman to head the International Monetary Fund, has renewed 
the global financial institution’s push to strengthen the role of women in the 
world economy, arguing that doing so can raise growth prospects and improve 
development.

These arguments may be more persuasive amid a global growth slowdown and in 
countries with rapidly ageing populations like Japan, where the female labour 
force participation rate lags the OECD average.

But the IMF has to tread a careful line on this issue to avoid explicitly 
critiquing the laws in its 188 member countries, including states like Mali and 
Yemen, which have been among the worst performers on indices of gender equality.

The IMF has sought to couch its arguments in economic terms, saying in a 
previous study that having as many women in the labor force as men could boost 
economic growth by 5% in the United States, 9% in Japan and 34% in Egypt.

In an IMF study released on Monday, Fund staff found that despite progress on 
gender equity, almost 90% of countries still have at least one legal 
restriction based on gender, and 28 countries have 10 or more such laws.

These include limits on women’s property rights and laws that allow husbands 
to prevent their wives from working or prohibit women from entering certain 
professions.

The study finds that amending laws biased against women has been linked to 
women’s increased participation in the work force - although it admits changes 
in the law may simply be a reflection of changes in social attitudes.

“In recommending equal opportunities ...this study does not intend to render a 
judgment of countries’ broadly accepted cultural and religious norms,” the IMF 
analysts added.
