
Our holiday in Cornwall is going well, I think. We are staying in what looks 
like a ski chalet but there is a strong smell of manure from the neighbouring 
farm. From our balcony we can see other families playing croquet on the grass. 
I like watching the other families, although I'm disappointed that none of 
their children get cross and chase each other with mallets. Unlike them we are 
not, I say out loud, a family that can play a whole game of anything to a calm 
conclusion. "Does that mean we're dysfunctional?" asks Maddy, not for the first 
time.

"I don't think so," I say defensively.

"Maybe it's just that we shout a lot." she says.

"Well, I'm trying to shout less," I say, rather hurt that she hasn't noticed.

This, our first holiday with all the children (including my 21 year old son 
Sam) post baby Flora, is meant to be a chance for us to spend a happy time 
bonding together. We all forgot to bring a camera so we'll just have to 
remember how happy we were. So far, the children have spent most of their time 
together in the evenings playing poker under Sam's rather fierce instructions. 
Sam, who wants to be an internet poker player, is torn between letting his 
younger sister win and risk me pointing out (meanly) that he can't be that good 
if he gets beaten by an eight year old. "I'm not really trying here," he 
whispers over his shoulder.

In the mornings, the sky is heavy with rain but it takes us all morning to get 
ready anyway. By mid-afternoon the sun usually comes out. It's hard to get us 
all out of the chalet especially in my new incarnation as a non-shouty person. 
It's even harder for us to agree on what to do. We decide that everyone can 
choose one thing they want to do this holiday. "The beach" says Sam.

We eventually get to the beach around 3pm. It's wide and sandy and full of 
families with wet suits, small tents or windbreakers, picnics and body boards. 
We have none of these things. Sam, it turns out, has even forgotten his 
swimming shorts. We huddle forlornly on some thin white towels I borrowed from 
our chalet. We have to sit near the steps because it's too difficult to get the 
pushchair through the sand. I feel I've let everyone down.

But the next day we come prepared. We buy little nets and buckets for rock 
pooling and the children have a surfing lesson. I beg the surfing instructor to 
forget everyone else in his group and just watch Lydia. "I said on the form she 
can swim but that's in a swimming pool, not in the sea."

"The little ones usually do the best," she says reassuringly.

And as I stand shivering knee deep in the Atlantic ready to leap in and save 
her, Lydia casually surfs past me on to the shore. J's choice is fishing and we 
book a trip for 1pm in St Ives the next day. At 1pm that morning we are in a 
traffic jam arguing about whose fault it was we didn't leave earlier. We miss 
the trip.

Lydia wants to go to Land's End. "There's a 4-D cinema there," she says, 
flourishing a tourist leaflet.

We get there just in time for the last showing at 4.45pm.It's a short pirate 
film with a water spray under the seats. Afterwards we walk along the cliff top 
and I'm touched when the children rush to help me with the pushchair. "Be 
careful mum,"says Sam anxiously, "Don't go too near the edge."

In fact, it becomes difficult to push Flora at all as they crowd round to be 
helpful. In a rush of love for them, I wonder if we've bonded happily after all.
