
How not to eat sushi

Anyone can tell you how to eat sushi. There are sushi bores from here to Japan 
who just can't wait to explain how not to dip the rice side of your nigiri into 
the soy sauce and to always eat it in one bite. Only use chopsticks for 
sashimi. Use your fingers for sushi rolls, and on a mixed platter, always eat 
the rolls with the seaweed on the outside first. Never mix the wasabi into your 
soy sauce, you sushi-snacking peasant. In fact, you must only ever eat wasabi 
with sashimi, while smugly acknowledging that the bright-green fusion of 
chemicals on your plate, a mixture of horseradish and mustard powders laced 
with food dye, bears little resemblance to the subtle complexity of true 
wasabi, the best of which is grown in gravel stream beds under black curtains 
in an area to the south west of Tokyo.

Impart this information at every godforsaken opportunity. Remind all that you 
started eating sushi years ago, long before it became the rage. Make your date 
feel small by pointing out that the pickled ginger should be used as an 
inter-course palate cleanser, not as an accompaniment. Always eat the sashimi 
garnish, which will usually be a bit of green stuff and some radishy nubbins. 
Knock three times on the ceiling if you want more. Twice on the pipes, bing, 
bing, means you are choking on a lump of bigeye and require a glass of water.

On and on and on it goes, a riot of sushi rules and regulations, of customs 
and etiquette demanded by tradition and, yes, a certain amount of snivelling 
food snobbery, all to consume a simple snack of rice balls and fish. Samurai 
warriors never had this problem. They just tossed it down like krill and got on 
with perfecting their pony tails and making lush tartare of their enemies. In 
comparison, today's sushi diners are faced with a barrage of dilemmas before 
they even sit down at the counter to crack open their disposable wooden 
chopsticks. Yet increasingly, the most important question they must ask 
themselves is not how to eat sushi, but how not to eat sushi.

It started off as a way of preserving the fish that were left high and dry in 
paddy fields following floods; now it is taking over the world. The problem 
with sushi today is not how to manoeuvre kappamaki from plate to mouth without 
everyone screaming with laughter at your lack of technique, but how to escape 
the stuff. The planet is awash with California rolls and strips of inferior 
salmon trapped in little coffins of rice. Sushi is in the supermarket, in 
shopping malls, in sandwich shops, at the airport. It is available from Mumbai 
to Morecambe, in Des Moines and in des res everywhere. Most notoriously, it is 
available at high-end restaurants where gourmands pay huge sums to be 
titillated by scraps of the finest seafood. At Masa in New York, which holds 
the distinction of being the most expensive restaurant in America, customers 
pay around $300 for the basic omakase menu at Masayoshi Takayama's sushi bar.

At Umu in London, chefs in geta sandals hand-squeeze sushi and serve real 
wasabi to high rollers who don't mind indulging themselves with 
three-figure-plus bills. Just like the eel they serve, no one gets out of Umu, 
or restaurants like it, without being skinned. Alive, if possible. Unagi tastes 
better if the chefs cut them open while the creatures are still squirming, 
because the taste component breaks down rapidly once death sets in. Perhaps 
that's why sushi presentation is so abstract and so pretty; it disguises the 
bloodlust and brutal murder that goes on behind the scenes.

If you are the kind of diner who is willing to dice with mercury poisoning and 
scomboid side effects, then eating raw fish does clearly have health benefits. 
I mean, have you ever seen a dolphin with acne or depression? They all look as 
sleek as seals who, incidentally, are no slouches themselves if there's any 
sashimi in the offing. However, anyone gorging on crunchy tuna rolls and 
avocado/crab combos in the great sushi middle market that is taking over the 
world should not be deluding themselves that what they are eating is a healthy 
product. It is an empty banquet of fishy Liquorice Allsorts, bullets of starchy 
carbs, lozenges of sugared, factory rice with a central vein of greasy, farmed 
fish. Did Carrie and co realise they were dicing with empty carbs when they 
chatted over uramaki at Manhattan's Sushi Samba in Sex and the City? Did 
Lindsay Lohan realise what she was ingesting in last year's sushi-fuelled 
romcom, Just My Luck? Salmon and tuna are farmed in great, sea cages to feed 
the global sushi market. Trapped in the deep, they grow fat through a lack of 
exercise and room to move. It is this very fatness - toro, the fatty tuna belly 
is highly prized - that gives sushi lovers the 'melt in the mouth' sensation 
that they crave. 'Sushi makes me hum, and I only hum after sex,' says Julian 
Clary, which is possibly a sushi fact too far. Meanwhile a Japanese news agency 
claims that Princess Diana was recently spotted alive and well in a sushi 
restaurant in Chigasaki where she was eating whale - a 'delicacy denied her 
during her years as a princess'. Really, sushi is spooky stuff. Take my advice. 
Just say no. At least to sushi bores, if not to sushi itself.

Three places for raw fish

Umu 
14-16 Bruton Place, London W1 (020 7499 8881)

Is this London's most upmarket Japanese restaurant? Well, Rupert Everett dines 
here, which says it all. Rupert recently complained that people who use private 
jets are just not as stylish as they once were. He comforts himself at Umu, 
with a choice of a dozen different mineral waters and a courtly kaisake menu. 
Let's hope he doesn't bump into Nicky Haslam, who thinks sushi is 'dreadfully 
common'.

The Captain's Galley
The Harbour, Scrabster, Caithness (01847 894999)

Chef Jim Cowie once dreamt of teaching himself how to make sashimi from a 
book. 'How hard can it be?' he said, perhaps not realising that Japanese sushi 
chefs must undergo a 10-year apprenticeship. Jim's other specialities include 
Asian steamed pollock with sweet-and-sour cabbage. The Galley is situated in a 
former Victorian ice house.

Il Clandestino
Baia di Portonovo, Ancona, Italy (0039 071 801 422)

This is just a simple shack on the beach serving Italian-style sushi and weird 
hybrids of tuna tataki. Instead of soy, wasabi and ginger, parsley, lemon, 
olive oil and lime are used as flavourings and seasonings. It shouldn't work 
but it does, and brilliantly so.

Read Jan Moir's restaurant reviews at areyoureadytoorder.co.uk 
<http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk.> 
A new review is added every Thursday.
