
Having grown up in Western Australia, all I knew about Albury before my visit 
was that it’s a stopover on the drive between Sydney and Melbourne. A poll of 
my Sydney and Melbourne friends revealed similar ignorance. “Albury to me has 
always been that place you are forced to stop for a toilet break,” one friend 
helpfully offered.


With the bar of expectation set, I flew out of Melbourne on a Friday afternoon 
for the one-hour journey to the regional city, which sits on the NSW side of 
the border next to the Murray river. Flights are in the range of $250-$400 
return from either Sydney or Melbourne, or you can drive from the latter in 
just over three hours.

What I discovered in 48 hours was a place that, even in the chill of winter, 
is a picturesque spot for outdoor activities. There are worse ways to spend a 
frosty but sunny afternoon than cycling through the town, strolling along the 
Murray or trekking up Monument Hill. If I’d more time I would have sought out a 
kayak and spent some time on the river as well. A couple of apps will serve you 
well if walking is your thing; try the Albury historic walking tourapp 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=air.com.visitalburywodonga.WalkingTour&hl=en>
, or the Albury Wodonga Appy Townapp 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/app/albury-wodonga-appy-town/id888794180?mt=8>.
 Albury’s Botanic Gardens. 
The local arts scene is also thriving, with the Murray Art Museum Albury (MaM 
<http://www.alburycity.nsw.gov.au/leisure-and-culture/Alburys-new-art-museum>
a), formerly the Albury Regional Art Gallery, undergoing a $10.5m redevelopment 
tipped for completion in September. Just as the Bendigo art gallery in Victoria 
helped to put that regional city on the map by attracting international 
exhibitions (it is now one of Australia’s most popular galleries), it’s hoped 
the MaMa revamp will help Albury become a destination rather than a mere 
stopover.


Related: 48 hours in Melbourne: what to do, where to go 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/18/48-hours-in-melbourne-what-to-do-where-to-go>

But if you’re visiting before the gallery restoration is complete, there are 
other cultural and artistic experiences to be had, including at the Central 
Desert art gallery – the only Aboriginal-owned Indigenous gallery between 
Sydney and Melbourne. There is also the new, 5km Yindyamarra sculpture walk 
along the Murray river which features sculptures by some of the area’s most 
talented Aboriginal artists.


If good food and wine are on your radar, new cafes and wine bars that 
specialise in locally sourced produce are cropping up throughout the district. 
As a region with a strong emerging culinary scene, Albury is worth visiting for 
a couple of days for the indulgence alone.

Friday

4pm – check-in at Atura Albury hotel


Atura Albury is located on Dean Street right in the town centre, within 
walking distance of the Botanic Gardens and MaMa. The $139-per-night hotel has 
been gettinga lot 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/life/travel/atura-albury-a-lifestyle-hotel-with-plenty-of-cool-and-panache/story-e6frg8rf-1227217456462>
 ofattention 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/travel/special-features/best-for-2015-top-hotels/story-fnpm6tiu-1227076976547>
of late 
<http://www.gourmettraveller.com.au/travel/travel-news-features/2015/6/albury-atura-hotel/>
, with branches also in the western Sydney suburb of Blacktown and in the 
south-east Victorian town of Dandenong.


Atura has a philosophy of supporting and promoting local music and art, with 
wall coverings and bespoke furniture throughout the communal spaces and 
corridors. The night I arrive there’s a cocktail function being held for 
artists exhibiting as part of the Albury Wodongaopen arts circuit 
<http://www.awartsoc.org/circuit-open-studios-weekend/>.

To be honest, I’m not so interested in the artistic finishings, the urbane 
industrial spaces throughout the building or the weirdly placed “art” behind 
the toilet in my room. The complimentary bikes, downstairs bar, free Wi-Fi and 
proximity to the main drag are what appeals to me.

7pm – dinner and cocktails

After finishing some work in my room I head down to the hotel’s Roadhouse Bar 
& Grill restaurant ($19-39 mains), which offers classic pub fare with an 
American twist such as popcorn prawns and buffalo wings. There’s also a full 
cocktail menu.

 The Roadhouse Bar & Grill, attached to the Atura Albury hotel, serves 
traditional pub fare with an American twist. 
The servings are generous and the food much better than I’ve come to expect 
from dining establishments attached to hotels. By the time we make our way 
through entrees of salt and pepper squid and bruschetta, our mains (a slab of 
Angus sirloin for me), sides of baked baby beetroot and goat’s cheese salad, a 
couple of bottles of Woodstock cabernet merlot and a nightcap of Camparis, it’s 
close to midnight and I haven’t even left the hotel.


Saturday

8am – breakfast, a bike ride and the Botanic Gardens

Breakfast is complimentary at the hotel, but there are a plethora of cafes 
nearby and I’d recommend venturing to one of those, such as the Early Bird cafe 
on Dean Street. It offers fare like French toast topped with lemon curd, 
blueberry compote and toasted almonds, or for $10, bagels topped with smashed 
avocado, tomato and feta.


Then there’s Mr Benedict <http://mrbenedict.com.au/>, also on the main drag, 
which serves all-day breakfasts, locally-roasted coffee and bloody Marys. It’s 
packed every time I walk past and obviously popular with both locals and 
tourists.


I grab a bike (they can be hired for $30 for a day from Cycle Station 
<http://www.cyclestationalbury.com.au/> next to Albury railway station) and 
cycle along the Murray river, which is stunning on a chilly winter’s morning as 
ancient trees reflect on the water’s surface and autumn leaves cover the ground.
 The Murray river in winter. 
The Murray is home to dozens of endangered bird and mammal species, and there 
are plenty of walking trails to be found. Playgrounds and barbecue facilities 
also dot the water’s edge.


I drop my bike at the hotel, leaving it feeling a little worse for wear – 
Albury is hilly in parts and the hotel bikes were built for flatter ground. 
Then it’s time for the five-minute walk to the Botanic Gardens, established 
more than 130 years ago. With its vibrant colours, it’s the best place to read 
for an hour or two on a sunny day.

1pm – lunch at the River Deck cafe at Noreuil Park

Surrounded by towering elm and plane trees, and located right on the Murray 
river in Noreuil Park, the recently launched River Deck cafe has become a 
popular attraction.

Currently closed on Mondays and Tuesdays as the restaurant fine-tunes its 
breakfast, lunch and dinner menus, by spring the owners hope to be open seven 
days.

Some of the lunch offerings today include eye-fillet steak served with 
mushroom, tomato, spinach and a choice of Béarnaise or red wine sauce; 
slow-cooked pork belly with chestnut spaetzle; and ricotta gnocchi with 
herbed-sautéed garlic mushrooms, spinach, creamed pesto and parmesan. Dishes 
range from $14 (soup) to $30 (Riverine premium scotch steak).
 Dessert at the River Deck cafe: chocolate pudding with liquorice and 
freeze-dried raspberries. 
I recommend sitting outside on the deck, which overlooks the park and the 
water. Despite the serene location and upmarket menu, the River Deck is 
extremely child-friendly and there is a large playground outside as well.

4pm – a visit to the Central Desert art gallery
 Aaron Perkins-Kemp-Berger (left), the manager of Albury’s Central Desert art 
gallery, with owner-curator Sam Juparulla Wickman. 
I am so lucky that on the day I visit the Central Desert gallery (611 Dean 
Street), owner-curator Sam Juparulla Wickman and manager Aaron 
Perkins-Kemp-Berger are on hand and willing to give me a private tour.

This small upstairs gallery is flooded with natural light, which bring the 
works to life. The gallery opened in May and Juparulla Wickman tells me it was 
“standing room only” as locals came to support them, buying 11 of the works on 
display.


On the day of my visit there’s an exhibition representing the “dot-dot 
movement”, which came out of central Australia, Juparulla Wickman tells me.

“These works are traditional expression but with a contemporary twist, and 
many of them represent bush tucker and food gathering practices,” he says.

“We’re not a souvenir shop, we’re a fine arts gallery, and we want to 
encourage local artists to get involved and then take them on a journey from 
their art through to curation.”

On 15 August, the gallery will launch its Ochre exhibition, a collection of 
works that recall the colours of 90s Indigenous painters, representing a feast 
of country and colour.
 A work from the Central Desert fine arts gallery. 
8pm – dinner at the Border Wine Room

The Border Wine Room offers high-end food with wine to match. Tonight we go 
for the six-course tasting menu ($109 with matching wines) which changes 
fortnightly. Among the dishes tonight is beetroot gnocchi, stout-braised beef 
cheek and a cheese platter with crostini and quince.

The cosy upstairs restaurant also features an elegant bar serving snacks like 
edamame and spiced almonds. And on the first Saturday of every month, the 
Border Wine Room offers the chance to sample their new menu by way of an 
eight-course degustation, with diners then asked to rate each dish and provide 
feedback to the chef ($85, or $115 with wines matched).

Sunday


8am – breakfast at Green Zebra cafe, followed by the Yindyamarra sculpture 
walk with local elders

The Green Zebra specialises in handmade pasta dishes, but is also open for 
breakfast and is the place to go if you have a hankering for classics like 
bacon and free-range eggs ($14) or bircher muesli ($10.50). Everything is made 
in-house or sourced locally.

After breakfast we head off on the Yindyamarra sculpture walk, a 5km amble on 
the Wagirra trail between Kremur Street and the Wonga Wetlands and featuring 11 
sculptures along a route created by local Aboriginal artists.

“Yindyamarra” is a concept in Wiradjuri culture meaning respect, to be gentle, 
polite, honour and do slowly. With this in mind, we take our time strolling 
along the trail, admiring the art which tells of the local Aboriginal history 
and its cultural significance to the Murray river region. Today, elders Uncle 
Tony and Uncle Curtis lead us along the path.
 An artwork on the Yindyamarra sculpture walk in Albury, NSW, representing the 
bogong moth migration. 
There are big plans for this route, Uncle Curtis tells me. Eventually he’d 
like to see it stretch for 70km. Already the path is busy with joggers, 
families and cyclists..

We come to Uncle Tony’s favourite piece, a large “googar”, or goanna, carved 
from wood. “He fell off the back of a truck,” Uncle Tony says. “He was a 
monster ... we had to carve him down. Then we soaked him in cedar oil. He’ll 
last 20 years.”

An artist himself, Uncle Tony taught local school students how to sand and 
carve the sculptures that now feature along the walk. Works by prominent local 
artists can also be found, including a series by Carmel Taylor of vertical 
message sticks with native animals intricately carved into red river gum.
 Uncle Curtis and Uncle Tony with a wooden goanna sculpture along the 
Yindyamarra sculpture walk in Albury. 
The sculptures are accompanied by interpretative panels and videos, which can 
be swiped with a smartphone.

2pm – lunch at Brick Lane

It seems fitting that a weekend of food and wine should end with another 
generous meal. Brick Lane’s menu features a range of energising foods, 
including smoked salmon on quinoa fritters, Moroccan vegetable stew served with 
lamb kibbeh, and wild mushroom risotto. Prices range from $14-$18 for breakfast 
and lunch, or $22-$35 for dinner.
 Lunch at Brick Lane in Albury: chicken breast with avocado salsa and sweet 
potato crisps. 
I choose the chicken breast with avocado salsa and sweet potato crisps paired 
with a sauvignon blanc, before taking a final walk along Dean Street until I 
reach the edge of the Botanic Gardens. From there I trek to the top of Monument 
Hill where a white ferro concrete tower stands built by residents to 
commemorate those who died in the first world war.

From the top there are stunning views of the Albury Wodonga region to admire. 

 * The writer travelled as a guest of Destination NSW <http://visitnsw.com>
