
• Overlooked in all the “Piggate” hooha was one additional likely attraction 
for Paul Dacre of serialising the Ashcroft/Oakeshott biography of David 
Cameron, on top of putting the boot into the PM and setting the news agenda. 
That hidden bonus was the spotlight thrown on Oxford’s Piers Gaveston dining 
club, described in the paper’s first extract as “notorious” and “specialising 
in bizarre rituals and sexual excess”. Among the former student stalwarts of 
this alleged cesspit of debauchery, after all, is Mail on Sunday editorGeordie 
Greig <http://www.theguardian.com/media/geordie-greig>, whose relationship with 
Dacre is reportedly tense. Easily findable online is a Brideshead-style photo 
of Greig at a Piers Gaveston ball (also attended by Hugh Grant and Nigella 
Lawson) in 1983, clad in the kind of sailor suit once worn by aristocratic 
toddlers and with a floral wreath on his head. No porcine pranks are 
discernible in the background, but it’s scarcely an image that shouts “future 
Daily Mail editor”.

• Such allegations seem to belong to a long-standing tradition, it was 
suggested at an Exaro panel discussion last week on whether the press has ever 
held power to account. City journalism lecturer Glenda Cooper said she had 
asked her academic colleagues for past examples of the media scrutinising the 
mighty, and was told of a 10th-century Byzantine chronicler who accused the 
emperor Alexander of some reprehensible behaviour with a pig. Nothing changes 
in terms of reliability either – the chronicler’s source was also anonymous and 
therefore impossible to trust.

• For the Sun’s rookie Westminster correspondent Harry Cole, it’s not been the 
best of spells – and just when he was keen to impress new editor Tony Gallagher 
too. Although the former Guido Fawkes sidekick has scored a few splashes, they 
have a tendency to prove dodgy. Like the claim that Jeremy Corbyn “will kiss 
Queen’s hand to grab £6.2m”, later shown (on BuzzFeed) to be based on a false 
assumption of a connection between Privy Council membership and securing state 
funds for Labour. Or the supposed scoop that Corbyn long ago gave £45 to an IRA 
man on the run, which, as a law professor pointed out on Twitter, was alleged 
by the Times back in 1987 only to be retracted 12 days later. And then there 
was Thursday’s Cole corker, “BBC boss and Savile Cover-up”, which was wholly 
indebted to a Meirion Jones article about Alan Yentob (who denies the claim) in 
an issue of Spectator Life that also hit doormats at dawn on Thursday, but 
nevertheless was run in the Sun with “Exclusive: Yentob Storm” above the 
headline. To be fair, though, “Derivative: Yentob Storm” doesn’t have quite the 
same ring.

• After moving upmarket from the Sun to Mail Online , Katie Hopkins 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/katie-hopkins> is guaranteed a warm reception 
from her new sisterhood, the middle class paper’s existing female columnists, 
judging by their past pieces on “Hatey Katie”. Although Jan Moir has abstained 
from Hopkins-bashing, perhaps refusing to stoop to her level, Amanda Platell 
has condemned her as an example of “women who shame a sister for having a 
normal, healthy body … and who then pass off jealousy as wit”; while Sarah Vine 
addressed the “Apprentice loudmouth’s” TV fat-shedding stunt by saying “I can’t 
help feeling she has a head-start on the rest of us: after all, her brain can’t 
weigh very much, can it?”

• At the Mail on Sunday - whose writers will also become perforce her 
site-sisters onMail Online <http://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online> – the 
hostile mood is even more marked. Liz Jones, after appearing on Hopkins’s TLC 
talkshow, reported that she was abused by the hostess (accused of “looking 
weird” and being mentally ill) and so was everyone else except a gay comedian – 
“I would say she’s like an autistic child with Tourette’s, but that would 
insult young people with real challenges”. And TV critic Deborah Ross is also 
unlikely to have sent an email congratulating MO overlord Martin Clarke on his 
new signing, having devoted one review to wondering how Hopkins manages to “put 
on her despicable persona at 7am” and keep it on all day in case there’s a 
sudden demand for an “evil comment”. After weighing up ways to make her “go 
away”, and clearly seeing it as inconceivable that she and Hopkins might ever 
become teammates, she concluded by asking: “How much would a sniper cost, if we 
all clubbed together?”

• Monkey thoroughly enjoyed the excitable press release sent out by Seven 
Dials, the Simon Kelner-founded PR company looking after Radio X (formerly 
Xfm), following Chris Moyles’s debut in the rebranded station’s breakfast slot. 
Picking out the former Radio 1 DJ’s supposed best soundbites, the release did 
cite his rejection of media chat about Radio X being a stag station (“a load of 
balls … it’s not a radio version of a Yorkie bar”) but failed to reflect the 
extent of Moyles’s diatribe or, not altogether surprisingly, the fact that what 
he slagged off on air as “balls” was not the mistaken perception but the Seven 
Dials campaign that led to it. “There was a quote saying that Radio X is going 
to be the UK’s first male-focused radio station and many people took that to 
mean it’s just for blokes, by ruddy blokes, playing ruddy bloke music .… It was 
just a marketing thing, and should never have gone out in the press release.” 
Still, as the radio reviewer in the hapless Kelner’s former paper, the Indy, 
pointed out, Radio X’s weekday line-up consists of eight men and one woman (and 
she is “from 1am to 4am”), so going for the bloke angle wasn’t entirely 
misleading.

• These are tense times for BBC director general Tony Hall, so he can readily 
be forgiven a bit of mental time-travelling where he confuses his first stint 
at the Beeb with his current one. Unfortunately his latest senior moment was at 
the high-profile, celeb-rich recent BBC1 autumn launch (the night of 145.50 
stars, quips Monkey’s man at the venue, the studio home of upcoming drama 
Dickensian), where in his “roll-call” of attractions the nature spectacular Big 
Blue Live became, oh dear, Big Blue Line, in a mix-up with Ben Elton’s mid-90s 
cop comedy The Thin Blue Line. Happily, Hall was able to jump forward 20 years 
again and look forward to an inter-office W1A version of The Great British Bake 
Off where (“I’m the lucky person doing the tasting”) his role will be to mimic 
fellow-Merseysider Paul Hollywood, or possibly Mary Berry.

• Benefiting from fine early autumn weather, the inaugural Radio Times 
festival unfolded over the weekend at Hampton Court with a rich programme of 
events embracing TV, radio and books. Monkey’s reliable berry-based counting 
system suggests, however, that of these sessions 40 involved programmes or 
people wholly or mainly associated with the BBC, compared with only eight 
ITV-related offerings - a split unlikely to have gone down well with the 
commercial broadcaster in the very month it celebrates its 60th birthday. 
Still, if RT editor Ben Preston is determined to make this mustering of Middle 
England an annual affair, a less stodgy name is available: at an in-house 
hooley earlier this year, TV editor Alison Graham naughtily proposed 
“Prestonbury” instead.
