
The Yale University basketball captain expelled after a university panel found 
he’d had sex with a fellow student without her consent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/14/yale-basketball-sex-assault-team-captain-lawsuit>
 has filed a lawsuit against the school claiming he was unfairly used as a 
“poster boy for tough enforcement” in the wake of national attention against 
Yale’s handling of sexual assault.

Jack Montague’s civil lawsuit, filed on Thursday in the US district court for 
Connecticut, claims that the female involved – referred to by the pseudonym 
“Jane Roe” – was “misled” into filing a formal complaint of sexual misconduct 
against him.

In February Montague, then 22, was dismissed from Yale, after a female student 
filed a complaint in December 2015 saying that he had had sex with her without 
her consent. A university-wide committee upheld the complaint and recommended 
Montague’s dismissal.


Montague’s departure from Yale kicked off weeks of unrest at the school 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/08/yale-basketball-captain-expelled-jack-montague>
 over whether the basketball team – which had just won the Ivy League 
championship and reached the NCAA tournament for the first time since 1962 – 
was supporting their team-mate at the expense of female students on campus.

The lawsuit outlines the complaint made against Montague by the female 
student, which says that after a party on 18 October 2014 at Montague’s house, 
the pair engaged in consensual sexual activity in Montague’s bedroom. Montague 
then “got on top of Roe in order to engage in sexual intercourse”. Roe, 
according to the documents, says that she “put her hands up, pressed them 
against the front of Mr Montague’s shoulders and pushed him, but not very 
forcefully” and told him: “No, I said I wanted to hook up but not have sex.”


According to the documents, Roe said Montague behaved as if he had not heard 
her and proceeded to have sexual intercourse with her. Montague denies that Roe 
told him she wanted to “hook up but not have sex” and that she pushed against 
his shoulders, saying he believed the sex was consensual.


After the incident, Roe spoke to deputy Title IX coordinator Angela Gleason – 
named as a defendant in Montague’s suit, along with senior deputy Title IX 
coordinator Jason Killheffer and the university itself – who handles complaints 
of discrimination, including gender and sexual assault.


Montague’s lawsuit says that after an initial discussion, where Roe said she 
wanted to make an anonymous informal complaint against Montague and requested 
he receive training in consent, Gleason told her that was not possible because 
of a past incident for which Montague had already received training.


That incident was from Montague’s last day of freshman year, when a graduating 
female senior said Montague rolled up a used paper plate from a pizza 
restaurant and “shoved it down [her] shirt between her breasts”, according to 
the lawsuit. A university-wide committee ruled that it was an incident of 
sexual harassment, placed Montague on probation for four terms and required him 
to undergo sexual harassment and gender sensitivity training.


Montague’s lawsuit says Gleason caused Roe to believe the past incident was 
also sexual assault, “misleading” her into filing a formal complaint against 
him.


Roe later told the university committee that upon learning Montague had 
already been disciplined for an incident, “[her] perspective broadened … as 
[she] began to think about the other people on this campus and how [her] 
choosing to remain silent on this matter could harm them”, according to the 
lawsuit.


Montague announced his intention to sue Yale back in March 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/14/yale-basketball-sex-assault-team-captain-lawsuit>
, when his lawyer Max Stern said Montague was used as a “whipping boy” for 
Yale’s past failings over the handling of sexual assault incidents.

In 2013, the US Department of Education fined the school $165,000 for 
underreporting sexual assaults a decade earlier. Yale has the highest number of 
reported sexual assaults of all the Ivy League universities,according to a 
campus climate survey released in September 
<http://provost.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/WestatReportYaleUniversity-1.pdf>

“[Yale] seized the opportunity to make an example of him because he was one of 
the most prominent male figures on campus,” the lawsuit reads.


A statement released by Montague’s lawyers and his PR rep added: “Expelling Mr 
Montague – as rare a sanction as that was for Yale – served the desired end: 
dramatic proof that the University is able and willing to severely punish male 
students, even the captain of Yale’s basketball team, when they ‘victimize’ 
female students on Yale’s campus.”

Montague was due to graduate in May this year. “His promising future crumbled 
into dust,” reads the lawsuit. The lawsuit calls for Montague to be reinstalled 
as a Yale student, the incident to be expunged from his student records and 
transcript and requests unspecified damages.


A statement from Yale, provided by spokesman Thomas Conroy, said: “The lawsuit 
is factually inaccurate and legally baseless, and Yale will offer a vigorous 
defense.” Conroy noted that only about one in 10 incidents of sexual misconduct 
hearings at the university end in expulsion.

