
I once sat in a child safeguarding case review, as a clinical psychologist, 
with a young woman with serious mental health problems who was about to lose 
her child to the care system. Although she knew on some level that she couldn’t 
cope with the demands of parenting, the meeting was still devastating for her 
because she loved her child and had wanted things to be different. She got 
upset and angry; she struggled to listen and she raised her voice. The 
experienced social worker who was chairing this meeting scolded her for being 
too emotional; she seemed cross that this young woman was making the meeting 
more difficult. I was shocked at her lack of empathy and wondered how often the 
social worker got irritated with vulnerable people, but I didn’t mention it to 
anyone.

Years ago I worked with a nurse who was consistently unkind to patients with 
dementia, talking down to them like children and dismissing them in an 
irritated way if they made demands on her time. I wondered whether I ought to 
say something to the ward manager but ultimately took it no further. As one off 
incidents these are not too bad but if they are indicative of more pervasive 
behaviours then this is worrying.

I sometimes think about these scenarios and I wonder why I didn’t speak up. If 
you were aware that patients were being exposed to a risk that you wouldn’t 
want for your loved one, would you raise the alarm? Also, if someone had 
concerns about your clinical practice would you want someone to mention this? 
How much has the Freedom to Speak Up review (February 2015) had a positive 
impact on howNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> organisations are 
dealing with these issues on the frontline? Although there is a new policy 
document covering whistleblowing procedures in my mental health trust, I am 
sceptical about whether fellow healthcare workers or I actually feel more 
confident to disclose our concerns now.


The Freedom to Speak Up review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sir-robert-francis-freedom-to-speak-up-review>
 is a valuable document; it highlighted the shocking lack of freedom that 
healthcare workers felt they had to raise an alarm in the face of poor patient 
care. Few health workers would be surprised to learn that their wider 
colleagues also felt scared of being labelled troublemakers or that they would 
rather keep their heads down for “a quiet life”. It doesn’t surprise me to 
learn this either but it does make me angry and sad.

In mental health services in particular we see people at their most 
vulnerable, often ostracised from family, peers and society because of their 
issues and in grave need of compassionate care with healthy boundaries around 
it. If we can’t stand up for them if we feel something isn’t quite right then 
who will? If we don’t stand up for them and we allow them to feel worse about 
themselves then we are repeating unhealthy patterns from their lives and 
slowing their recovery. In the case of the dementia patient, the nurse’s 
behaviour could have been deemed emotionally or physically neglectful.


A quick survey of colleagues past and present reveals a variety of viewpoints 
but all with a common thread. We would love to raise certain concerns and 
sometimes we have tried but who will listen and what will change? One of my 
colleagues raised a couple of issues but was told by her manager that she would 
be seen as a troublemaker or bully if she continued to pursue them. Being a 
less senior member of staff, she has backed down. What is the point of trying 
to change the unchangeable? Why tell a manager about something that concerns 
you if the staff member is question is their friend and they have protected 
them in the past? Learned helplessness can make clinicians more stressed; 
stressed out mental health services can’t support stressed out clients.

Related: Whistleblowers who raise concerns still at risk of losing their job 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/mar/18/whistleblowers-raise-concerns-jobs-loss-nhs>

In addition to the earlier incidents, I have been exposed to a handful of 
other examples of at best thoughtless care – interventions with a lack of 
evidence base carried out by inexperienced clinical staff; students sent out to 
see our most challenging clients due to a lack of available qualified staff; a 
locum worker trying out a new therapeutic approach without supervision. 
Certainly not what I would wish for my loved ones.


I am hopeful that at least my organisation has acted on the recommendations of 
the review. I would like to believe it is possible to create a culture where we 
can support each other to do a better job by reflecting on our strengths – but 
also on our limits and mistakes. Turning a blind eye to poor practice helps no 
one; the staff member doesn’t get the opportunity to see if they can develop 
better skills or they don’t get the negative consequences that perhaps are 
fitting. Meanwhile patients don’t get the chance to experience the good quality 
care they deserve and perhaps they sometimes suffer more. Speaking up is 
essential when safety and wellbeing are at stake and something we ought to be 
less afraid of doing in mental health services.


If you would like to write a blogpost for Views from the NHS frontline 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/views-from-the-nhs-frontline>, 
readour guidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/aug/12/highs-lows-nhs-write-guardian>
 and get in touch by emailinghealthcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:healthcare@theguardian.com>.


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
