
The dilemma I am a 17-year-old gay man who doesn’t have the courage to live 
how I want. Being gay has easily been the most daunting thing of my life. I 
found out roughly when I was 14, and for the past three years it has been 
ruining me. At first I despised myself and I ended up in counselling, which 
lead to a face-to-face confrontation with my mum, telling her I would rather 
not be living. I slowly came to terms with it thanks to the wonderful friends 
I had the courage to tell. If it wasn’t for them I would have lost it. However 
the thought of telling my family makes me numb. The worry has ruined me for the 
past three years, to the point where my GCSE results were below expected.

Mariella replies What are you afraid of? It’s not a rhetorical question, but 
fundamental to finding answers. Telling your parents about yoursexual 
orientation <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sexuality> is clearly 
complicated by myriad considerations that are affecting your actions, but which 
I remain in ignorance of. Knowing how you fear your parents might respond, 
their general attitudes on such issues and their expectations of you would have 
been immensely helpful – without that my response might not be as focused 
as you might have hoped.

As with everything in a world where there are billions of us, you are not 
alone in your fear of disclosure and the initial discomfort you describe that 
came with self-discovery. I’m really glad you saw a counsellor when your 
feelings of self-loathing were at their height, and I’d certainly recommend 
revisiting a professional or qualified peer as you make this next step in your 
progression from chrysalis to butterfly. For any teenager these are years of 
experimentation, awkwardness and revelation, and understanding your sexual 
orientation is just part of your natural metamorphosis from childhood to 
maturity.

You are lucky that you have such clarity about who you are. So many of my 
letters are from young people who don’t have your certainty and are equally in 
turmoil, but without a clue as to the cause. You are gay. And unless your 
parents are religious zealots or particularly narrow-minded it really shouldn’t 
come as too much of a shock. Watching your children grow up it’s pretty 
difficult not to recognise such details, even subliminally, unless you close 
your eyes and stick your fingers in your ears whenever they’re around, which 
can be tempting at times.

I’ve mentioned the disadvantage of my not knowing your parents and being 
clueless as to what their response is likely to be, but thankfully that’s not 
really the issue. You are who you are, and both you and they deserve the mutual 
respect of being honest with each other. I do know that there are very few 
mothers (or fathers) who’d prefer their child to tell them that “they’d rather 
not be living” than that they’re gay. If your parents do fall into that extreme 
minority then it’s imperative, rather than simply a suggestion, that you seek 
out the support of a counsellor via Switchboard, the LGBT+ helpline (
switchboard.lgbt <http://switchboard.lgbt>; 0300 330 0630), or Get Connected (
getconnected.org.uk; 
<http://www.getconnected.org.uk/get-help/gender-identity-and-sexual-orientation/>
 freephone 0808 808 4994). Coming out to those you most crave approval from is 
a watershed moment, but also potentially one of liberation and epiphany.

I’m hoping you’re fretting unnecessarily. You’ve mentioned the warm embrace 
offered by your friends when you confided in them, and that should have fuelled 
and encouraged you to take disclosure to a broader constituency.Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> equality has yet to completely 
saturate society, but these days being gay is low on the seismic chart 
registering sexuality shockers. For most of us in the developed, educated world 
it has long ceased to be a discriminatory issue in principle and is on its way 
to becoming a humdrum fact of life. You’ve already delivered the worst news to 
your mother you possibly could when you said that life held no appeal, so when 
you explain the root cause of that existential misery it may even come as 
a relief.

We’ve come a very long way in a short time, but deeply buried prejudices, or 
simply the desire for your child to have the easiest life possible, might 
initially cloud a parent’s judgment on being told such news. The important 
thing is that you have nothing to be ashamed of and the same potential as your 
contemporaries to lead a rich and fulfilling life.

My experience of storing things up in fear of judgment is not extensive – I 
tend to be a blurter rather than a hoarder. It’s clear that maintaining what 
you believe to be a “secret” is taking its toll on you in terms of your study 
and your emotional wellbeing. Make sure you have someone looking out for you 
and then get it off your chest. This is definitely a case of better out than in.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
