
This month’s GCSEs are stressful for all year 11 students, but for some they 
are an almost insurmountable hurdle. One girl in my school, Lily, has the 
ability to do very well in her exams but her life is a mental health nightmare. 
We have done our best to help, but we know it is not enough.

Lily is a bright student but this year her attendance has been down to about 
50%. She is one of a growing number of children in my school withmental health 
problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/29/government-expert-warns-child-mental-health-crisis-worse-than-suspected>
. About 10% have severe issues, and up to 30-40% have a problem that affects 
their life but may not seem severe or evident to others. With services being 
cut or neglected, schools can become the only help left.

According to Lily’s mother, her dad wasn’t interested in the child until he 
figured out that he enjoyed hurting her – emotionally and physically. When the 
incidents increased, her mother contemplated suicide.

Related: Our children’s mental health crisis is shocking. But so is the Tory 
silence | Frances Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/children-mental-health-crisis-tory-silence-austerity-natasha-devon-axed>

Eventually her mother fled with Lily to a “safe house”, a refuge run by a 
women’s charity. They spent the next few years on the move. Lily’s father would 
discover their location and the cycle would start again, despite a restraining 
order that was meant to prevent him from coming anywhere close to them.

When Lily was nine she was kidnapped by her father and kept locked in his 
bedroom while he spent time with women. When Lily cried, he beat her severely. 
When the police found her, she had several fractures and many bruises. By this 
time, Lily was almost completely mute and would not leave her mother’s side. 
Even now, she suffers constant pain and she still insists on her mum meeting 
her after school.

While her father was in prison a voluntary worker came into Lily’s life, who 
found her and her mother a flat, a new school (ours) and a counsellor. Legal 
arrangements were put in place to protect them, including a change of names.

The father was released from prison last year, and Lily hasn’t been in school 
much since. She wants to stay with her mum – feeling safe, keeping mum safe. 
She is certain her dad is looking for her. She’s afraid he’ll sit outside each 
school in the area until he finds her. She is afraid one of her friends will 
take a photo of her and post it on Facebook and her dad will see it or that 
she’ll just bump into him somewhere.

When did we learn about Lily’s history? Not straight away, it wasn’t passed on 
by her primary school, nor by her mum. Because Lily is very bright, she enjoyed 
channelling her energies into school work. She was the model student. It wasn’t 
until the summer term of year 7, when the PE kit changed from tracksuits to 
shorts, that her name was passed on as a potential child protection case. She 
was refusing to wear shorts as she didn’t want anyone to see her legs. An 
informal approach to social services told us she was flagged and it was then, 
once we invited her mother in to see us, that the truth came out.

Related: Teachers have to be therapist one moment, social worker the next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/31/teachers-natasha-devon-childrens-mental-health-tsar-schools>

There are other vulnerable children whom we care for who manage to breeze 
through their GCSEs and move on successfully. Things have been more difficult 
for Lily. She agreed to meet teachers in the cafe of a local supermarket to 
complete her controlled assessments. All the time, she kept an eye on the door 
for fear of her father walking in; I’m not sure we can use that as an 
extenuating circumstance for the examinations board.

In the run-up to exams I asked her mother if there was anything else I could 
do to support Lily. There wasn’t. She keeps thanking me for the extra work her 
teachers have emailed home, and for the visits from Lily’s head of year to make 
sure everything is all right.

Lily’s mum is very like a lot of the women in our community. She is fiercely 
private and does not accept help easily. She believes that she is doing the 
best for Lily by keeping her past a secret because this gives her normality. 
But it doesn’t, because Lily spent years suffering in silence. This doesn’t 
help her healing.

We have supported all the referrals to child and adolescent mental health 
services (Camhs), though Lily doesn’t like any of the people she meets and 
feels patronised. She doesn’t like to think of herself as having a mental 
health problem; she would rather “sort” things herself.

We provided access to our in-house counsellor, but when Lily’s attendance 
dropped, we had to offer her place to someone else – we couldn’t waste the 
money on an unfilled chair when so many other children also need it.

We are all rooting so hard for Lily. Her teachers adore her, are bending over 
backwards for her, but are worried that if she now doesn’t perform in the GCSEs 
it will reflect on them, regardless of what I say. That’s how high-stakes it 
can feel, even if the head is saying don’t worry, the teachers do worry.

There is nothing I can do for Lily besides encourage her to come in to school, 
take her exams and see if they can help her on to the next stage. We agreed 
that one of the teachers would drop Lily home after late revision sessions, 
just to ease her nerves. We have to get her here for all the papers. So far, 
it’s going OK.

Related: Academies guilty of the most blatant gaming of all: a school place 
only for the brightest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/29/academy-school-place-educating-essex-special-needs>

I was reflecting on Lily’s predicament not long ago with a colleague from 
another school; he asked me why I hadn’t talked her mother into home-educating 
her so that Lily wouldn’t show up in the all-important attendance and results 
data. This is abhorrent: to some school leaders, vulnerable children are just 
something that get in the way of “good data”.

With more and more children struggling with their mental health and with less 
and less money to provide support for them, I can see an awful lot more 
children like Lily being home-educated or being sent to unsuitable alternative 
provision.

Some schools do not want these children. They are not interested in the 
underlying causes of their poor behaviour whether it is trauma, mental health 
or learning needs. These children are expensive – staff time, patience, agency 
involvement, less academic progress and often lower attendance.

There has to be a way to support schools in keeping such children, and turning 
them into “good data”, because there seem to be fewer school leaders who 
actually act on their moral purpose.

Some details have been changed to protect identities

In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
