
Tinder’s chief executive has revealed the dating app tests new features in in 
Australia because users there don’t “cross-pollinate” with the rest of the 
world very much.

Sean Rad said that the simple virtue of Australia being “far away from 
everywhere” meant it was a safe place to roll out changes to the app without 
influencing users elsewhere.

“There’s not a lot of science behind it. Australia is very far away from 
everywhere else, there’s not a lot of cross-pollination,” Rad told Cosmo editor 
Farrah Storr on stage at Advertising Week Europe in London. “If you are going 
to leave Australia it’s a big deal.”

Related: New website lets anyone spy on Tinder users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/05/tinder-swipebuster-spy-on-users-privacy-dating-app>

Australians are alosuseful for testing new features because they are early 
adopters, he added.

Some of the features Tinder <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tinder> 
has tried out in Australia first include the “super-like” for paying users to 
show the really are into someone, and the so called “Tinder blend” which orders 
how potential matches appear based on different criteria, such as popularity or 
distance.

However, Rad said it shelved the feature allowing users to “force” two 
Facebook friends on the service.

He said: “We launched in the very early days, a product called Matchmaker. You 
could take two of your friends and could force them to match with each other.”

“It was very popular amongst a smaller group of our audience. But we decided 
to take out of the app because our internal policy is if the majority of our 
user base doesn’t get value out of something we’ll remove it.”

For those seeking killer advice for how to find a match on Tinder, in either 
hemisphere, Rad said his main tip was that headshots that don’t at least hint 
at someone’s features beyond their looks don’t work well.

Instead, he says budding daters on the service should go for: “shots that 
display what you look like, but also the environment you live in, your 
interests”.
