
Copenhagen makes the perfect weekend break: compact and easy to explore on 
foot or by bike, and only a short hop from London.

Related: Introducing Copenhagen: sophisticated Scandinavian city breaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uncover-cool-copenhagen/2016/may/23/introducing-copenhagen-sophisticated-scandinavian-city-breaks>

You’ll find historic sights such as the ramparts of the Citadel or the 
Christiansborg and Amalienborg palaces, as well as cutting-edge architecture in 
the form of the National Aquarium, the Black Diamond or the Opera House. Enjoy 
trendy cafes, bars and galleries in the buzzy young districts of Vesterbro and 
Nørrebro, or sample the finest new Nordic cuisine at restaurants such as Radio 
and Höst.


The prize includes British Airways 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb> Euro Traveller return 
flights from London Heathrow, two Copenhagen Cards and two nights at the
Arp-Hansen Hotel Group <http://www.arp-hansen.com/>’s newly refurbished 
Imperial Hotel. The Imperial marries stylish design with the convenience of a 
central location near Tivoli Gardens and City Hall square.


For your chance to win, simply enter your details below.


Terms and conditions

 * The VisitDenmark Copenhagen prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to 
residents of the UK aged 18 and over. 
 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize 
Draw. 
 * Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions. 
 *  To enter the Prize Draw you must complete the online registration form 
above. All required information must be completed to enter and to be eligible 
to win. Incomplete entries will be disqualified. Proof of entering information 
at the Website is not considered proof of delivery to or receipt by Sponsor of 
an entry. Internet entries must be made by the entrant only at the Website. 
Entries made by any other individual or any entity, and/or originating at any 
other web site or e-mail address, including, but not limited to, commercial 
competition subscription notification and/or entering service sites, will be 
declared invalid and disqualified for this Competition. The use of automated 
entry devices is prohibited and no mechanically reproduced entries are allowed; 
all such entries are void. Competition Entities are not responsible for: late, 
incomplete, incorrect, delayed, garbled, undelivered, or misdirected entries. 
Sponsor reserves the right to disqualify any person or e-mail address that 
submits more than maximum allowed entries. All entries become the exclusive 
property of Sponsor and will not be acknowledged or returned. No purchase is 
necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in 
connection with the Prize Draw, please email us at
competitions.glabs@theguardian.com <mailto:competitions.glabs@theguardian.com> 
with “VisitDenmark Copenhagen Prize Draw” in the subject line. 
 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winners shall be the 
owner of the e-mail account from which the selected winning entry is sent. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 
 * The Prize Draw opens on 23 May 2016 and closes at 23:59 on 1 July 2016. 
Entries received outside this time period will not be considered. 
 * The winner will receive a trip for two (2) to Copenhagen, Denmark. The 
prize includes roundtrip Euro Traveller airline tickets with British Airways 
from London to Copenhagen for two (2) persons. Also included in the prize are 
two (2) nights’ consecutive accommodation, in a double occupancy room, at the 
Arp-Hansen Hotel Group’s newly refurbished Imperial Hotel, and two (2) 72-hour 
Copenhagen Cards. There are no costs involved for the winner (and guest) 
regarding flight transportation to and from Copenhagen. The winner (and guest) 
will fly from London Heathrow to Copenhagen Airport. The winner (and guest) is 
responsible for costs regarding transfers to and from the airport, any 
insurance needed and spending money and any other personal expenses. The winner 
is solely responsible for all applicable state and local taxes and/or any other 
fees/costs associated with the prize or receipt of the prize. Times and dates 
are subject to availability. Citizens from some countries need visa in order to 
travel to Denmark. The winner is responsible for organising any required visa 
and covering any costs involved. All travel arrangements are subject to 
availability, blackout dates & other restrictions. The prize is valid until 31 
December 2016 and is subject to availability. Winner & guest must travel on the 
same itinerary throughout. Rebooking and changes are not permitted. Tickets are 
non-refundable and non-transferable. No prize substitution, except by Sponsor, 
in its sole discretion, if advertised prize is unavailable and only then for 
prize of equal or greater value. No prize transfer. The Sponsor is not 
responsible for cancellation, delays or changes or any other part of the prize 
or for the inability of the prize winner to take up any part of the prize due 
to problems with travel or any other factor outside Sponsor’s control.
The Sponsor reserves the right at its sole discretion to substitute the prize 
with another prize of equal or greater value in the event that the 
aforementioned prize is not available. By accepting either of the 
aforementioned prizes, the First Prize winner agree to release the Released 
Parties, to the extent permitted by applicable law, from any and all liability 
whatsoever for any injuries, losses, or damages of any kind caused by entering 
the Competition or for damages of any kind caused by any prize or resulting 
from acceptance, possession, or use/misuse of prize awarded, or while preparing 
for, participating in, and/or traveling to and from any prize-related activity.
 GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that 
are not expressly included in the prize. 
 * The winner will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries 
received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take 
place on or after 1 July 2016. 
 * The winner will be notified by e-mail on or after 4 July 2016 and given 
details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM within 
14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be forfeited 
and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with the 
process described above (and that winner will have to respond to notification 
of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their prize). If a 
winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of these terms, 
the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select 
another winner. 
 * The name and county of the winner[s] can be obtained by sending a stamped 
addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian Labs, Guardian News & 
Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. 
 * The prize[s] is/are non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable 
for cash or any other prize. 
 * GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of 
similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. 
 * The winner may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Prize Draw and the winner shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winner consents to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize 
Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name 
for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, 
and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its 
related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize 
Draw, all entrants consent to the same. 
 * The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you supply 
to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize 
Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal 
injury resulting from its negligence. 
 * GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into. 
 * GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts. 
 * Promoters: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 & 9GU & VisitDenmark, 55 Sloane Street, London SW1X 9SY 