
Tell us about Alzheimer’s Society

We are the UK’s leading dementia charity, providing care today and searching 
for the cure for tomorrow. Our workforce of more than 10,000 volunteers and 
2,600 employees work tirelessly to make a positive impact on the lives of 
people affected by dementia.


What are the key challenges you face in the coming years?

Dementia is a challenge to society as a whole; every three minutes someone in 
the UK develops dementia. Everyone has a responsibility to play their part in 
transforming how we think about and act on dementia.

One key internal opportunity is the importance of sustaining the society’s 
internal organisational development programme. Right at the heart of this 
multi-year change programme is the goal of building a more collaborative, 
efficient and effective organisation. Our overarching objective is to align and 
amplify our collective efforts so people affected by dementia can receive more 
of the services, support and information they need every day.

What are the values and beliefs that drive the society’s work?

Our organisational values - integrity, excellence, challenge, inclusivity and 
enablement - permeate everything we do at Alzheimer’s Society. The values are 
lived in every volunteer and employee through every interaction and we are very 
proud of this. It makes us a genuinely values-led place to work and volunteer.

While all our values are important, inclusion is perhaps paramount. Dementia 
does not discriminate and, as an organisation, we need to better reflect and 
represent the communities we serve. Most importantly, we always seek the 
opinions and views of people with dementia and their carers to shape our work.

The society aims to “change the face of dementia research”. How will it do 
this?

We are committed to spending at least £10m a year on research. We fund 
research into thecause 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=1829>, 
cure 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=1831>, 
care 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=1832> 
andprevention 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=1833> 
of all types of dementia. We will work actively towards a cure, and also 
provide services and initiatives that enable people with dementia to live the 
lives they want to live, for as long as they are able to. We are also a 
founding partner in the UK’s first dedicated Dementia Research Institute. Worth 
a total investment of £250m, it is the greatest investment of its kind this 
country has ever seen.

In your strategy, you talk about demonstrating best practice in dementia care 
and support. How do you know it when you see it?

There are many longer term metrics, including people living in their homes for 
longer where possible. Other indicators of our success will include the 
commissioning of our services, the continued funding and roll out of services 
we design and seed fund and, most importantly, the feedback we get from our 
service users regarding the impact these services have on them.

Another important aspect of our engagement with dementia is our effectiveness 
in raising public awareness and shaping the policies that relate to dementia. 
We influence nationally and locally through our trusted brand, ensuring the 
voice of people affected by dementia is heard and listened to.

What kind of career environment does the society offer for volunteers and 
employees?

We are striving to create an environment where all individuals are able to 
fulfil their potential and progress within the organisation. Our people are our 
key differentiator and developing them develops us and our work, ultimately 
benefiting people affected by dementia. Our aim is to establish a culture of 
continuous learning and, supported by appropriate learning and development 
initiatives, we believe we will nurture and retain the professional, passionate 
people we already have as well as those who join us in future.


What qualities, skills or aptitudes do you look for in new employees?

Of course, the knowledge, skills and aptitude to do the job at hand is the 
initial prerequisite. Beyond that, however, it’s about the drive and desire to 
make a difference. It’s a very exciting time to be part of Alzheimer’s Society. 
You will enjoy a collaborative team culture and ongoing training and 
development. But more than that, you will be able to look back in five, 10 or 
15 years time and know that we transformed the ways in which the most 
vulnerable members of our society are seen and supported.


In five years’ time, what do you want the society to have achieved?

In five years’ time we need to see more self-mobilised and galvanised 
communities where people with dementia are treated with dignity and respect, 
and where they can live lives as full and meaningful as possible. We need to 
create a movement of millions of people, each playing their part - in whatever 
way they can - in defeating dementia.

For job and volunteering vacancies at Alzheimer’s Society click here 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/recruit_list.php>.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Alzhemer’s Society
