
Testing, testing … and now even more testing


The government is trialling yet another round of tests for pupils in England, 
Education Guardian can reveal. The move would mean some children facing 
official assessments in all of the first four years of their education, withSats
 <http://www.theguardian.com/education/sats> in years 2 and 6. New baseline 
assessments for reception children are due to start from September.

In year 1, pupils already sit a “screening check”, which assesses their 
ability to decode text. Those failing it currently face a resit in year 2. Now, 
ministers are to trial a second resit of the phonics check in year 3, for those 
failing the assessment twice.

Separately, the coalition introduced a spelling, punctuation and grammar 
assessment for year 6 pupils. The Conservatives have already announced plans to 
introduce Sats resits in year 7 for pupils who failed to achieve good enough 
standards in year 6.

The phonics year 3 resit plans were unveiled in a notice on the Department for 
Education’swebsite 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-assessments-future-test-dates/future-assessment-arrangements>
. David Reedy, president of the United Kingdom Literacy Association, tells us: 
“The government seems to be obsessed with adding more and more high-stakes 
tests. The danger is that one particular group of children face more of the 
same, year after year: assessment preparation, then assessment, then repeat. 
What is needed is a proper diagnostic assessment of their needs.”

A DfE spokesman says: “It is essential that every child can reach their full 
potential. That is why under a voluntary pilot scheme, the phonics screening 
check has been extended into year 3.”

Elusive sponsors

Academy status seems to be looming for many schools currently overseen by 
local authorities that are in Ofsted’s “requires improvement” category. That is 
the implication of the Conservative election manifesto and comments by Nicky 
Morgan last week. But how many will truly be forced to take on academy status?

We ask because our analysis of the governance of schools that were already 
under huge pressure to improve under the coalition government – those graded 
“inadequate” by Ofsted – suggests that academy sponsorship has never occurred 
in many cases. This is despite this lowest grade triggering legal intervention 
powers by ministers.

Out of the 447 English schools currently rated “inadequate”, 240 – more than 
half – have yet to be converted into academies or recorded by the DfE as 
planned for academisation. Of these, 123 schools, or 51%, failed their Ofsted a 
year or more ago – yet still academy sponsorship does not seem to be on the 
horizon.

Previous DfE threats to turn all primary schools at the bottom of Sats league 
tables into academies have yet to be borne out in reality, as we havealready 
reported 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/dec/16/mark-steel-academies-sponsors-ofsted-dfe-local-authority>
. Is the issue a shortage of sponsors, we wonder.

Our calculations indicate that almost half of the sponsored academies that 
have had an inspection are themselves rated “inadequate” (12%) – or “requires 
improvement” (34%). So it remains unclear why academy status should be seen by 
anyone as a panacea.

Sats marking headache

The computer system with which examiners are marking this year’s Sats tests is 
facing a string of technical problems, we have learned.

As reported previously 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/12/sats-examiner-marking>, this 
is the first year when all Sats papers are being marked on screen, with written 
scripts scanned and sent to markers electronically. Marking began last week.

But an experienced KS2 reading marker tells us that every late afternoon, when 
markers go online after school, the Pearson ePEN software “starts limping”: 
freezing for up to a minute after the examiner submits each marked question. 
Each marker marks hundreds of questions.

Emails from those leading the operation confirm other problems, with one 
admitting that supervisors are not getting full access to reports on how 
markers are performing, while another says an online system for responding to 
markers’ queries about pupils’ answers is not working.

Our source adds that information is being passed from supervisors on how 
particular questions should be marked mid-way through the marking. She says 
that, unlike in previous years, the new system gives no opportunity for a 
marker to go back and correct the grading of previously marked scripts in light 
of this advice.

A Pearson spokeswoman says: “We have already successfully moved nearly half of 
[Sats] scripts over to the online marking system over the past two years. The 
final stage of this process is progressing to schedule this year.”

Powerful interests at work in academy move

Teachers are poised to stage another two days of strike action in protest at 
plans to turn three south London secondary schools,featured already 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/12/sats-examiner-marking> on 
these pages, into academies.

Members of the National Union of Teachers and National Association of 
Schoolmasters Union of Women Teachers at the Prendergast schools in Lewisham, 
south London, are due to walk out next Wednesday and Thursday unless the 
schools’ governors agree to allow a parental ballot on the plans.

Meanwhile, Education Guardian has learned, Frank Green, pictured, England’s 
national schools commissioner, who oversees the entire academies project for 
the DfE, has been advising the governors on the Prendergast academy move since 
last year. The advice is recorded in the DfE’s official register of interest.

A parent source says: “Prendergast parents were shocked to discover Green has 
been an adviser to the proposal. This shows that academisation is being driven 
ahead by powerful interests far removed from communities.”

David Sheppard, the schools’ executive headteacher, says: “Governors very much 
regret that two of the unions have induced their members to take strike action 
on days when there are important exams. The chair of governors and I met with 
the schools commissioner and his officials at the DfE in 2014 on one occasion. 
The DfE register of interests is a matter for the schools commissioner.”
