
Large numbers of those found guilty of murder under ‘joint enterprise’ rules 
may appeal to have their convictions overturned after the UK’s highest court 
ruled that the law had been wrongly interpreted for 30 years.

The supreme court declared 
<https://www.supremecourt.uk/cases/docs/uksc-2015-0015-judgment.pdf> on 
Thursday that a key test imposed by judges in assessing guilt in joint 
enterprise cases – where the accused acts in conjunction with the killer but 
does not strike the blow that causes death – had been incorrectly applied.

The judges’ unanimous decision is likely to trigger a rush of applications to 
the court of appeal by those convicted under a specific category of evidential 
rules, where defendants have “foresight” of what would happen before the murder 
was committed.

The five supreme court justices said that, for decades, courts had been in 
“error” in treating the fact that a secondary, co-accused had foresight that 
the principal attacker might carry out a killing as sufficient proof of guilt 
in assisting or encouraging them.

“The correct position is that … foresight of what the principal might do is 
evidence from which the jury may infer that he intended to assist or encourage 
to do so,” Lord Neuberger, the president of the supreme court said, “but it is 
for the jury to decide on the whole evidence of whether he had the necessary 
intent.”

Related: Correcting the joint enterprise law won’t lead to mass prison 
releases | Joshua Rozenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/18/joint-entrerprise-law-corrected-prison-releases-uk-supreme-court>

The judgment was described by Deborah Madden, from the Jengba (Joint 
Enterprise Not Guilty by Association) campaign, as a major turning point in 
British justice.

“The joint enterprise rule has been used to get mass convictions without 
evidence. It has caused devastation for families. We know of 650 people who we 
think will be affected by the ruling - and we don’t know everyone,” she said.


The judgment on Thursday came in relation to two joint enterprise cases, one 
in Leicester the other in Jamaica, where men were convicted of murder. Both 
murder convictions have now been set aside.

The British case involved Ameen Hassan Jogee, who is serving a life sentence. 
Jogee was convicted of murder even though it was his friend, Mohammed Adnam 
Hirsi, who killed their victim, Paul Fyfe, with a knife taken from the kitchen. 
Jogee was outside the house when the killing took place.

Jogee will remain in prison following the supreme court decision and his 
lawyers will have to make submissions about whether there should be a full 
retrial or whether his murder conviction should be replaced with one of 
manslaughter.


Changes to jury directions may result in fewer murder convictions involving 
gang fights, the supreme court acknowledged. “In cases where there is a more or 
less spontaneous outbreak of multihanded violence, the evidence may be too 
nebulous for the jury to find that there was some form of agreement, express or 
tacit.”

 It could also lead to the Crown Prosecution Service revising its policy on 
charging suspects. A CPS spokesperson said: “We are carefully reviewing the 
judgment handed down today to determine its impact and our subsequent approach 
to such prosecutions.”

In a highly critical report last year, the Commons justice select committee 
suggested that many people convicted of murder under joint enterprise rules 
should have been charged with manslaughter or lesser crimes and that the 
threshold for establishing culpability should be raised.

 The long-established principle of joint enterprise allows defendants to be 
found guilty of offences committed by another person if they have agreed to act 
together for a common purpose. Problems arise around what are said to be 
reasonably foreseeable consequences of any agreement.

Related: My brother got 19 years jail on a joint enterprise conviction. Now we 
want him home | Charlotte Henry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/18/brother-19-years-jail-joint-enterprise-conviction-law>

Almost 500 people are thought to have been convicted of murder between 2005 
and 2013 as secondary parties in joint-enterprise cases. Many were recorded as 
gang-related attacks.

The court of appeal is now expecting those who believe they have been wrongly 
convicted under the old foresight rules to apply for their cases to be 
reviewed. Recalibration of the evidential rules will not require parliament to 
re-examine any legislation; joint enterprise has developed through the common 
law.

The supreme court judgment traces the error to a 1984 judgment by the judicial 
committee of the privy council.

The new decision, the supreme court says, brings “the mental element required 
of a secondary party back into line with that which is required of the 
principal and to bring the law back to the principles which had been 
established before the law took a wrong turn”.

In the Leicester case, Jogee and his friend Hirsi visited the house of Naomi 
Reid on the night of 9 June 2011 supposedly for the purpose of consuming drugs. 
Reid asked them to leave before Paul Fyfe, with whom she was having a sexual 
relationship, returned. They left. Hirsi returned but was taken away by Jogee 
an hour later. Both returned again together. Hirsi went inside the house. Jogee 
stayed outside close to the front door, allegedly damaging Fyfe’s car.

There were furious exchanges between Fyfe and Hirsi. Fyfe went upstairs to put 
some clothes on, whereupon Hirsi went to the kitchen and took the knife. Jogee, 
still outside the house, threatened to hit Fyfe over the head with the brandy 
bottle in his hand. Jogee was said to have been “egging” Hirsi on to harm Fyfe. 
Hirsi then stabbed Fyfe with the kitchen knife, killing him. Jogee and Hirsi 
were both subsequently found guilty of murder and sentenced to life in prison.

Jogee appealed 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/oct/27/man-challenges-joint-enterprise-conviction-in-supreme-court>
 partially on the basis that, in these circumstances, foresight of a mere 
possibility that Hirsi would use the knife with the intention of causing at 
least serious bodily harm to Fyfe was not enough to prove a conviction of 
murder as against him.


Cases involving joint enterprise killings where there is clear evidence of 
someone encouraging murder to be committed are unlikely to be affected by the 
supreme court ruling. Appeals are likely to come from cases where evidence is 
less clear that the secondary defendants was aware of the consequences of what 
would happen.

The supreme court’s judgment was welcomed by many lawyers and organisations 
who have campaigned to change the law. Francis FitzGibbon QC, of Doughty Street 
Chambers, said: “This decision marks a sea change in a highly controversial 
area of law. It corrects a historic mistake in the law of joint enterprise, 
which until now had exposed people to being found guilty of the most serious 
offences on the weakest legal basis.

Related: Joint enterprise law: what is it and why is it controversial? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/18/joint-enterprise-law-what-why-controversial>

“The effect of the supreme court’s decision is that a member of a group cannot 
be found guilty of an offence unless there is proof that he or she positively 
intended that it should be committed. Mere foresight of what someone else might 
do is not enough.”

 Shauneen Lambe, director of Just for Kids Law, said: “In the last 10 years, 
[we have] seen a rapid increase in children being charged and convicted of the 
gravest of offences, including murder, under the controversial extended 
principle of joint enterprise, which means that they did not even have to 
intend an offence to happen to be found guilty of it. This has led to numerous 
miscarriages of justice – with vulnerable and learning-disabled children locked 
up for crimes that they did not intend to happen nor were they directly 
involved in.”


Sophie Walker, director of the not-for-profit Centre for Criminal Appeals, 
said: “We very much welcome today’s judgment to the extent that it offers new 
lifelines to the innocent people serving time in prison as a result of this 
disproportionate and ill-used doctrine.”


Vera Baird QC, the former solicitor general, said: “This will be extremely 
unsettling for the families of murder victims who are likely to have their 
suffering re-opened as cases are re-considered. It has been described rightly 
as a ‘lazy law’ and its exit will force more detailed care in the approach to 
dealing with defendants and their states of mind.

“Guilt by mere association has never existed in UK law but this ruling 
presents an obligation to reconsider better fairness for those who get caught 
up in crimes they did not intend and it will clearly protect young people who 
could have been convicted on an assumption of what was in fact their immature 
lack of foresight.”

A statement from Jogee’s solicitor said: “The law had incorrectly and unfairly 
developed to convict secondary parties on the basis of mere ‘foresight or 
contemplation’ of what someone else might do.


This over-criminalised secondary parties, particularly young people like Ameen 
Jogee. The consequence was that people were convicted of serious offences, 
committed by others, and imprisoned for lengthy periods.”

Sandra Paul, a criminal solicitor at the law firm Kingsley Napley, said: “The 
ripples from today’s decision will transform the fairness of future trials and 
potentially the whole lives of those who would otherwise have been caught in 
the joint enterprise trap. Guilt by association fails to provide justice for 
those accused or victims of crime.”

Juliet Lyon, director of the Prison Reform Trust, said: “This judgement brings 
useful clarity to a complex area of law which has been the subject of 
increasing concern from the cross-party justice committee, criminal justice 
professionals, policy-makers, penal reformers and others. In some instances 
sentencing under joint enterprise has acted as a dragnet. For families, victims 
and offenders, this judgement should prompt more precise and proportionate 
decisions at each stage in the criminal justice process.”

 Sean Caulfield, criminal partner, at the law firm Hodge Jones and Allen, 
said: “The test since 1984 was whether this second person had foreseen the 
possibility that the knife man would commit a serious assault. If this second 
person foresaw this, he was as guilty as the perpetrator.


“Yet today the Supreme Court ruled that in 1984 the law took a wrong turn and 
has imposed a new equally simple test: to convict a secondary party it now must 
be proved beyond all reasonable doubt that they ‘had an intention to assist or 
encourage the main party or offender’. Any foresight of the consequences of 
what might happen would be evidence of an intention of the second person, but 
would not on its own be sufficient.”



