 Bread and dripping at Story in London. Photograph: hungryhoss.com 
It is the final balmy evening of summer and the streets of Southwark in 
London, where city slickness is swallowing up the area's Dickensian shabbiness, 
look like a film set. I am in a modern, glass-walled restaurant, sitting at a 
blond-wood table. A candle flickers from an incongruous Wee Willie Winkie-style 
holder and the menus are tucked inside an old, handsomely bound tome. When the 
first course of bread and dripping arrives, the waiter points out that the 
molten wax pooling beneath the candle is in fact beef dripping.

The restaurant, which opened in the spring, is called Story, and it is perhaps 
the most literal example of the current cultural enthusiasm for revelling in 
the narrative powers of food. Each dish is delivered with a backstory (beef 
dripping was one of chef/patron Tom Sellers' dad's favourite tastes), and 
diners are encouraged to leave books and their own tales.

Italian chef Massimo Bottura (whose restaurant in Italy is No 3 on the World's 
50 Best list), is all about stories, too. Without them, he says, he'd have no 
recipes. The taglineon his website <http://www.osteriafrancescana.it/> is: "12 
tables in the heart of Modena tell a story of tradition in evolution," the menu 
quotes Proust'smadeleine moment 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4648185>. He has even 
made videos of the yarns behind some of his dishes, such asHomage to Thelonious 
Monk <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XAYVXQJTXEE> and An Eel Swimming up the 
River Po <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DzziipT1hbo>.

You could be forgiven for dismissing all this as pretentious twaddle, but 
Sellers earnestly says he first embraced the narrative side of food when he had 
taken his technical skills as far as he could. "I kept asking why I was eating 
something. It all leads to a story," he says. "Subconsciously, when you eat 
something, your brain is always comparing it to what you've had previously; it 
tries to find a similarity. The more powerful the story behind the food, the 
more it evokes the memory, which in turn enhances the flavour."

There is no doubt that flavour is inextricably linked with memory and emotion. 
They're all processed by the same part of the brain. So in posh cuisine terms, 
the story element could be seen as a natural progression from the sensory play 
of Heston Blumenthal and Ferran Adria's "molecular gastronomy", adding another 
cerebral and emotional layer. And a good story can engage us like nothing else.
 Gayle Chong Kwan at work. 
The artist Gayle Chong Kwan, who has been working with food and memory for 
more than a decade through community-based projects, views the restaurant 
world's foray into this area as somewhat gimmicky. She finds food a 
refreshingly accessible medium to work in, and rejects "the way in which 
playing with food and bringing out memories and stories and sensory experiences 
now seems to be for the very rich."

Next week, as part of a series of artist-hosted public dinners at Tate Modern, 
Chong Kwan will present a menu centred around the myth of Adonis, and her own
Chinese-Mauritian heritage 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/special-event/garden-adonis-dinner-event>
. The starters will be served on a bed of lettuce, similar to that upon which 
Adonis's body was laid to rest after being gored by a wild boar. His porcine 
killer is represented by five-spice-crackling pork with plum sauce. The spices 
are relevant because in ancient Greece, and in other cultures since, they were 
seen as "highly dangerous in arousing women's passions".

For Caroline Hobkinson <http://www.stirringwithknives.com/>, an artist whose 
theatrical, gastronomic storytelling events have become her full-time job, food 
is: "a manifestation of our longings. It is also how we remember holidays and 
big life events. It is almost the vocabulary of our life." She has concocted 
dinners in an air-raid shelter and a Berlin flat divided into pre-unification 
East and West, and leads a foodie walking tour of Shoreditch called Broken 
Biscuits, covering the original site of the Old Nichol, one of the most 
notorious slums of Victorian Britain.

On a more basic level, though, mealtimes are the traditional setting for 
friends and families to share and pass on stories. Good food loosens tongues. 
"When I like someone," says Hobkinson, "I say we should have dinner – as in, we 
should tell each other our stories." This chimes with Sellers, too. In his 
teens, he says: "I didn't give a shit about what my brother was doing, or my 
mum. But once a day we'd sit around the dinner table and everyone said what 
happened at school or work. Food brings people together and becomes a story in 
itself."

Many of the tales that have inspired Sellers' and Bottura's menus focus on the 
ingredients and the land that produced them, mirroring the current obsession 
with provenance (especially post-horsemeat scandal). But whether it's the 
stories, the fantastical recipes they inspire or the sense of fun in 
contributing something to his restaurant that sparks the diners' desire to 
share, Sellers says that people have deposited all kinds of books. One woman 
inscribed hers with a note explaining that she'd bought it for a holiday, but 
never got to read it because she met her husband on the trip. Aw, I say, can 
you remember which book? "I'm sorry," he replies with typical cheffy bluntness, 
"I've so many fucking books, I don't know."

• Gayle Chong Kwan's Garden of Adonis dinner will be taking place in Meschac 
Gaba's Museum of Contemporary African Art at Tate Modern on September 16
