
Last weekend, you went to a party and got drunk. When you came home, your 
mascara-smudged eyes shone and you were grinning from ear to ear. You were a 
lot of fun, particularly once you had been sick. “You’re the best mum, ever,” 
you slurred. “And I’m sorry about the Pimm’s!”

“The Pimm’s in the cupboard?” I asked, mopping.

“Yesh!”

“That’s been there for ever, no wonder you were sick.”

“EEEUUUUGGGGGHHHHHH!”

This is the year of beginnings … You have begun to drink, to be interested in 
sex and the adult world in general. And mine in particular. You ask me 
questions I can’t fully answer. I’m not embarrassed – I have always had a very 
broad mind and I believe in honesty. And yet my responses are compromised.

You think this is because the topics of sex, abortion and adoption (to name a 
few of your favourites) are too intimate for me. They are not.

My measured, almost reluctant, responses spring from the fact that I have 
screwed up so badly in my life, and I don’t want you to do the same. You are so 
bright, so deeply intuitive, and so funny; people gather around you to catch 
the light.

Unlike me, you are not riven by insecurity or haunted by the pain of the past. 
And nor do I want you to be. I have worked so hard to ensure that you are aware 
of the love that cocoons you, that you know about your beginnings and your 
family, that you are encouraged to take your drama to the sky and back, talk, 
laugh and rail at me in equal portion and none of it matters because of the 
love. See?

You know some things about me. You know I was adopted as a baby, but not 
really how that experience has shaped me. You know my dad died too young, for 
him and for me. You know I am pro-choice for women seeking abortions, but not 
about the ones I had, or why, or the deep scars they left. You know I am ill, 
but not much about the disease I have – its effects or implications – because I 
hide this too.

I want you to live your life without worry. Even when I am exhausted, I will 
watch Stella with you or listen to your English homework. Because you want me 
to. I can’t tell you the whole truth, not yet, I can’t tell you all of it 
because you’re not old enough. Am I afraid? Yes, always. I want you to 
experience the great adventure that your life will be, I want you to carry on 
being the beguiling mixture of confidence and modesty and empathy that you are. 
I want you to make your own mistakes … Just not quite as seriously as me and 
not with such bad timing or bad luck.

You are me. You are my exquisite gift to the world. And you will do something 
so amazing. I know, because you are me, but better. Better loved, better 
cherished … and with an excellent sense of timing.

Anonymous

• We will pay £25 for every Letter to we publish. Email family@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:family@guardian.co.uk> or write to Family Life, The Guardian, Kings 
Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include your address and phone number
