
A row at the heart of the cabinet over the treatment of “Brexit” ministers has 
escalated after the employment minister, Priti Patel, accused the cabinet 
secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood, of acting in an unconstitutional manner.

As Downing Street rejected claims of scaremongering by the Commons leader, 
Chris Grayling, after No 10 warned that it would take a decade to extricate the 
UK from the EU, Patel warned of a threat to the impartiality of the civil 
service.

Related: Is the civil service orchestrating an EU referendum cover-up? 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/q-and-a-row-ministerial-access-to-eu-papers-brexit>

Whitehall sources have confirmed that Heywood told senior civil servants that 
there would be times whenthey would have to bypass the six senior ministers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/28/eu-referendum-stop-personal-attacks-on-anti-eu-tories-duncan-smith-tells-cameron>
 who want to leave the EU.

And in a statement issued by the Vote Leave campaign group, Patel said: “It is 
important that the civil service maintains impartiality during theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. Jeremy Heywood’s 
unconstitutional act threatens the reputation of the civil service.

“Secretaries of state are responsible for their departments. For an unelected 
official to prevent them being aware of the information they need for their 
duties is wrong.”

Patel’s attack came as Grayling, who also supports Brexit, accused No 10 of 
embarking on a “relentless campaign of fear” after the government claimed that 
a vote to leave would lead to a decade of uncertainty. In its first official 
analysis into how Brexit would unfold in practice, the government warned that 
it would hit “financial markets, investment and the value of the pound”.

Grayling told Sky News: “People will not be impressed with this relentless 
campaign of fear. Claims that it will take twice as long to sort out a free 
trade deal with the EU as it did to win World War Two are clearly ludicrous. 
There’s a free trade zone from Iceland to the Russian border and Britain will 
still be part of it after we vote leave.”

Related: Grayling: let pro-Brexit ministers see all EU papers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/chris-grayling-let-pro-brexit-ministers-see-all-eu-papers>

David Lidington, the Europe minister, will outline the report to MPs in a 
statement on Monday afternoon. He will then launch a debate on the secondary 
legislation to set the date for the referendum on 23 June and to allow the 
Electoral Commission to designate the two “lead” campaigns.

Downing Street dismissed Grayling’s accusations. The prime minister’s 
spokeswoman said: “The prime minister would completely reject that. We are 
clear, both the prime minister in terms of his responsibility as prime minister 
and the government, to speak plainly about what the government believes is 
right for the country. That is that we will be better off, stronger and safer 
in a reformed EU.”

No 10 also rejected claims that Heywood was acting in an unconstitutional 
manner. Speaking before Patel released her statement, the spokeswoman said: 
“The guidance is clear, there have been no complaints raised with the cabinet 
secretary or his office on operation of that guidance. There is no outright ban 
on a government minister, whatever their position, receiving papers on 
EU-related business. Day-to-day EU business will continue in the normal way.

“On the issue of the EU referendum specifically there is a government 
position. But the prime minister has said to his ministers: I recognise this is 
an important choice so I will give you the option of taking a personal 
position, consequently suspending collective responsibility. The role of the 
civil service is to support the government’s policies and position of the day. 
Ministers who choose to take a different view are opposing that government 
position.”

But Bernard Jenkin, the chairman of the Commons public administration select 
committee, who is tabling an urgent question in the Commons, said Heywood 
appeared to be acting in an “unorthodox and unprecedented” manner. The row 
first broke out last week when Heywood issued guidelines banning civil servants 
from showing official papers related to theEU referendum 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> to Brexit.

In a move aimed specifically at Iain Duncan Smith 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, Heywood issued 
guidelines last week to ban civil servants from preparing new research for 
anti-EU cabinet ministers that could be used in the EU referendum campaign. No 
10 had feared that Duncan Smith, who has strong doubts about the welfare 
elements of the prime minister’s EU reform plan, would seek to ask his 
officials to assess the credibility of the plan.

At least one permanent secretary is understood to have raised concerns with 
their Brexit secretary of state that Heywood may be acting in a 
constitutionally inappropriate manner because secretaries of state, technically 
at least, are solely responsible for their departments under a seal granted by 
the Queen.

Officials in Heywood’s office are also contacting the private offices of 
ministers who have yet to declare which side they are supporting in the 
referendum, asking them to make their intentions clear. This is designed to 
work out whether they are entitled to see all papers in their department 
related to the referendum. Duncan Smith urgedDavid Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to reverse the Heywood 
guidelines.

Jenkin said that any attempt by Heywood to bypass a secretary of state would 
be unconstitutional and could be unlawful by infringing the Carltona principle, 
which says that officials in a department work “under the authority of 
ministers”. Jenkin, whose committee will question Heywood on Tuesday, said of 
the cabinet secretary’s guidelines: “This is unorthodox and unprecedented. In 
law the minister is indivisible from his or her department.”
