
A Canadian newspaper is under pressure to hold an independent investigation 
into the circumstances behind the death of one of its reporters.

Toronto Star environmental correspondent Raveena Aulakh was reported to have 
taken her own life on 28 May.

She left a note, discovered by her newsroom colleagues, in which she asked the 
paper not to publish an obituary or turn her death into a story. That request 
was honoured.

But rumours about the reasons for Aulakh having committed suicide swept the 
paper, andwere then reported by other newspapers 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/jane-davenport-leaves-star>.

They were fuelled by the surprise departure of the head of the Star’s tablet 
project, Jon Filson. Days later, it was announced that managing editor Jane 
Davenport was moving to another division of the publisher, Torstar.

Renewed speculation prompted the union that represents the Star’s employees to 
call for an independent investigation into her death. 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/news/canada/union-calls-for-independent-investigation-into-toronto-star-reporters-death>

It said the third-party inquiry should consider “events surrounding the 
tragedy” and “include workplace health and safety, and harassment issues.”

In response to that call, the Star’s public editor, Kathy English, issued a 
measured and sensitive statement on Tuesday, “When a private tragedy becomes a 
public spectacle 
<https://www.thestar.com/opinion/public_editor/2016/06/07/when-a-private-tragedy-becomes-public-english.html>
.”

She revealed that Aulakh left explicit instructions that her death should not 
be publicised. In her note, she wrote: “Please don’t talk about me. Please 
don’t let anyone write about me.”

English was sorry that, in making her statement, she was “going against the 
wishes of Raveena’s family”, but explained that with the public call for an 
investigation events had “spiralled out of control.” Aulakh’s death had become 
“news.” She continued:

“Journalists use the word tragedy a lot in reporting on the sad things of our 
world and to use it here seems to me to somehow belittle the dark grief so many 
of us feel now that one of us has died in such a heartbreaking manner.

The Star’s newsroom is reeling, trying to make sense of the reality that 
Raveena chose not to live any longer. I have worked in newsrooms for 40 years 
and have never seen anything like the level of grief and anger exploding here.”

She said emails found during “a thorough internal investigation... revealed 
that Raveena and Jon Filson... had been involved in a relationship for some 
time that had ended recently.

“Further, the clearly heartbroken reporter made allegations in those emails 
about an improper relationship between Filson and his boss, managing editor 
Jane Davenport...

“Action has been taken following this investigation. Filson and Davenport have 
lost their jobs in the newsroom.”


English reported that Torstar’s chief executive, David Holland, had told her 
the the investigation concluded that the company’s policies “related to 
workplace relationships and conflicts of interest... need to be ‘amplified.’”

The union does not think the measures go far enough and has rejected a 
management offer to talk about the matter.

English reiterated her past comments on the media coverage of suicide, saying 
it “demands caution, context and compassion, as well as deep understanding that 
suicide is never just another story, but the end of a life in the most tragic 
way possible. Sadly, that has become all too clear to all of us at the Star in 
recent days. RIP, Raveena.”
