
Q My girlfriend is studying fashion at Newcastle and her birthday is coming 
up. I would never attempt to buy her clothes, as she is incredibly fussy, but I 
would like to surprise her and get her a fashionable present. I'd have to be 
able to post it. Any ideas?

Richard

A Personally, I love books as presents. The best two coffee-table books 
published this autumn are Vogue Covers (mentioned in our recent A-Z of Fashion 
feature) and Dior: 60 Years of Style, which charts the fashion house's history 
since the invention of the New Look. They will both cost a fortune to post but 
are available at discounted prices onamazon.co.uk <http://www.amazon.co.uk>, 
which will post them for you. Or you could surprise her with a great fashion 
read like Camilla Morton's A Girl For All Seasons (Hodder & Stoughton, £16.99), 
which is out on 20 September. Not only is this a practical book of fashion tips 
and facts presented as a month-by-month guide, but there's also useful travel 
advice by designers such as Paul Smith, Christian Lacroix and Manolo Blahnik.

Alternatively, show your romantic side by buying a Luella T-shirt with the 
logo 'love, love, love' (net-a-porter.com <http://www.net-a-porter.com.>). 
Luella Bartley is one of the headline designers at London Fashion Week, so your 
girlfriend should be thrilled.

Q What are we supposed to wear on our feet when it's raining but too warm for 
knee-high boots? I'm sick of getting home with sodden feet.
Sally

A It sounds like you should invest in the new shoe boot! This has the shape of 
a shoe but is designed to sit high on the foot, just shy of the ankle. So 
they're more shoe-like than an ankle boot, but more boot-like than a shoe. It 
sounds complicated, but it looks great. And get a pair in this season's 
on-trend shiny patent leather - as seen at Lanvin and Dior - and the rainwater 
will just run off. I've found some sexy, colourful styles, Forties-inspired, 
that look great with a pencil skirt. Russell & Bromley has a simple 
black-patent pair, while Kurt Geiger has gone for detail with a lace-up and a 
statement zip style. And Christian Louboutin's metallic blue pair will let you 
step out in real style.

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
