
Ministers have given the go-ahead for New-York-style problem-solving courts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/07/moj-considers-specialist-courts-for-issues-such-as-domestic-abuse>
 in which judges review the progress of convicted offenders after sentence with 
the aim of keeping them out of prison.

Such courts – which often specialise in handling drug or alcohol addiction, 
domestic abuse and housing cases – involve imposing non-custodial punishments. 
Those convicted have to appear regularly before the judge to be assessed.

Related: Looking for better ways to make prison work in the 21st century | 
Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/22/looking-for-better-ways-to-make-prison-work-in-the-21st-century>

A pilot programme involving a number of courts is already under development 
and will be formally launched later this year. A joint working group involving 
judges and Ministry of Justice (MoJ) officials endorsed the scheme and is 
examining how it can be expanded.

Announcing the initiative, the justice minister Caroline Dinenage said she 
hoped it would provide alternatives to prison for female offenders who are 
particularly at risk behind bars.

The justice secretary, Michael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, has expressed enthusiasm for 
the type of problem-solving courts developed in New York and met some of the US 
judges who run them.

The US tribunals focus on identifying and dealing with each offender’s 
underlying problems and preventing their re-offending. If they fail to engage 
with rehabilitiation efforts they can be sent to prison.

Gove has pledged to reform prisons without reducing the inmate population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/01/gove-prison-reform-reducing-inmate-numbers>
 but this latest initiative derives from New York judges whose explicit aim is 
to end America’s enthusiasm for mass incarceration.

 Addressing a meeting in the Royal Courts of Justice in London earlier this 
week, the most senior judge in New York’s state courts, Judge Lippman, said: 
“It is up to those who care about the administration of justice to think out of 
the box to make it happen – not to be soft on crime or tough on crime but 
rather to be smart on crime.

“We are grappling with the issues of over-incarceration in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> and around [the US].” Courts, he 
said, could serve as an agent for change. Imprisonment for six months, he 
added, increased the chance of reoffending. “Sending people to jail may 
actually harm public safety.”


The lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, attended the meeting, which 
was held in his court. The MoJ has not revealed how many courts will be 
involved in the pilot programme nor how much money has been allotted to the 
scheme. Lippman said investment in problem-solving courts, which involve judges 
spending longer on each offender, would save money overall by reducing the more 
expensive bills incurred by keeping inmates locked up.


The initiative will also draw on the experience of the few specialist courts 
already running in England and Wales such as the family, drug and alcohol 
courts. Other specialist courts have fallen by the wayside because of lack of 
official support.


Dinenage said: “Over the coming months, together with the judiciary, we will 
be developing our plans for the first pilot courts in England and Wales. 
Criminal behaviour is often driven by underlying problems – alcohol and drug 
addiction, for example – that are not being properly adressed.


“These problem-solving courts, by looking at each offender as a person to be 
helped as well as punished, place their underlying problems at the heart of 
each case.


“Judicial supervision, with appropriate levers and sanctions, becomes key to 
real change. It’s about turning someone’s life around and making the public 
safer.”

Current re-offending rates are “scandalous”, she said. “Far from being an easy 
option, problem-solving courts – like prison reform – become part of a 
problem-solving strategy that will benefit the public and keep them safe. 
That’s why breaking the cycle of reoffending is such a priority for this 
government.


“The more ideas from the frontline judiciary, the more effective these reforms 
will be.”


Dinenage, who is also the minister responsible for female prisoners, added: 
“It’s abundantly clear that the question of women offenders should be looked at 
very carefully, especially those who are pregnant or with young children, 
because of the negative effect of a custodial sentence. Problem-solving courts 
… may be particularly helpful in diverting women to the services they need.”

Phil Bowen, director of the UK’s Centre for Justice Innovation, which has 
championed New-York-style problem-solving courts, welcomed the government’s 
commitment. “We know from research,” he said, “that a defendant in a 
problem-solving court is a third less likely to go on to commit more offences 
than those going through a traditional court.

“It’s a new way of seeing the role of courts in this country – as places 
offering real opportunity to change people’s behaviour and lives for the 
better. If done right, the tough-love, practical approach will slot into and 
strengthen our court systems – cutting crime and improving public safety.”


How problem-solving courts work

Last summer the justice secretary, Michael Gove, visited Newark municipal 
court in New Jersey, where convicted offenders are brought back regularly to 
have progress on community sentences assessed. The judge can send offenders to 
prison for failing to comply with rehabilitation orders.

Judge Alex Calabrese, who presides over criminal courts in Red Hook, Brooklyn, 
<http://www.courtinnovation.org/project/red-hook-community-justice-center> also 
met Gove in London last December 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/dec/25/give-magistrates-leeway-us-judge-alex-calabrese-tells-michael-gove>
 and explained more about the pioneering US community courts he oversees.

The Red Hook court uses an enhanced range of community and social service 
sentencing options. A proportion of defendants are given medium- or long-term 
judicially supervised treatment orders for drug addiction, mental illness, or 
other problems.

 The majority of defendants receive short-term social or community service 
sanctions, typically five days or less in length. The aim is to identify and 
resolve problems in the community and reduce the number of conventional jail 
sentences handed down.

The first such community court in the US was set up in Manhattan’s midtown 
area in 1993 
<http://www.courtinnovation.org/research/they-treated-me-person-inside-red-hook-community-justice-center>
. It worked with businesses that were losing trade because crime was so 
disruptive around Times Square.
