
Is there a more versatile word in the English language than "cheese"? You can 
be cheese paring in cheesecloth. You can be cheesecake, or a big cheese. You 
can say "cheese" with a cheesy smile. And it may be hard cheese, but possibly 
you could be cheesed off trying to turn a cheese-head bolt.

Cheese is a fine, democratic food, too. "Many's the long night I've dreamed of 
cheese," says Ben Gunn in Treasure Island. "I fill up the chinks with cheese," 
says RS Surtees' Mr Jorrocks. "What a friend we have in cheeses!/For no food 
more subtly pleases/Nor plays so vast a gastronomic part": so wrote one William 
Cole. This is all by way of commending to your attention British Cheese Week, 
which begins today.

British Cheese Week grew out of the British Cheese Festival, which was spawned 
by the British Cheese Awards, and all were made possible by the formidable 
energies of an ebullient New Zealander, Juliet Harbutt. The first awards were 
held in 1994 at the Naval & Military Club - the In & Out - in London. I 
remember it because I was a judge and there were 296 cheeses entered. For this 
year's awards, there are more than 900 to be sniffed, nibbled and assessed, on 
all of which you can pass your own judgment by turning up to the festival this 
weekend at Cardiff Castle. (Unfortunately, at the time of writing, I can't give 
details about what, exactly, is going on during the week because there's just 
too much and, says Harbutt, "things keep changing all the time". You can find 
out what's happening in your area onthecheeseweb.com 
<http://www.thecheeseweb.com>.)

The very existence of the awards strikes me as remarkable, given the 
independent, not to say cranky, nature of the artists of artisanal 
cheese-making and the narrow-minded pragmatism of the big cheese-making 
battalions. I haven't always seen eye to eye with all the awards, and the 
impassioned debate between judges is in marked contrast to the amiable civility 
of, say, the Booker prize. And so it should be: our cheeses are something about 
which we should feel passionate. The French are, about theirs, as are the 
Italians, Spanish and Greeks. So why not us? When it comes to cheese, we need 
bend our knee to no country.

Admittedly, this wasn't always the case. Until the 80s, the British cheese 
universe was in a pretty ropey state. Mousetrap was the term for the 
non-specific cheddar-type cheeses at the time, while the hunt for the mythical/ 
legendary Dorset Blue Vinney caused much humorous excitement in the media in 
the 70s - such a fuss over a cheese? It was possible to find fine cheeses back 
then, but it was hard work - I can't tell you of my excitement when I 
discovered that Hargreaves of Clitheroe aged stilton in the cellars below the 
shop. It was at a time when such care was rare.

Since then, the number of cheeses, and their quality, have grown and grown - 
old cheeses, new cheeses, cow's milk cheeses, sheep's milk cheeses, goat's milk 
cheeses. (I except what are known as novelty cheeses - you know, the ones with 
the consistency of soap that's been left in bath too long, with chilli, apricot 
or chocolate embedded inside. I once judged these for the awards; I dream about 
them from time to time and wake screaming.) Hard cheeses and semi-soft cheeses 
- cheddar, stilton, lancashire, caerphilly, cheshire - have long been one of 
the glories of the British table. Now the pantheon is broadened to include 
Milleens, Waterloo, Tymsboro, Flower Marie and Tunworth, all cracking soft 
cheeses. And our great cheese-makers are associated with great cheeses: 
Montgomery's Cheddar, Kirkham's Lancashire, Wigmore's Spenwood.

"But I, when I undress me/Each night, upon my knees/Will ask the Lord to bless 
me/With apple pie & cheese." So wrote Eugene Field (1850-1895), writer and 
cheese lover. Though, on second thoughts, let's forget the pie and stick to the 
cheese.
