
“Good preparation,” it was once said, “is at the heart of a successful 
operation.” Who it actually was who first said that is lost to time, but no 
journalist has ever been sacked for falsely attributing a quote to Winston 
Churchill, so let’s say it was him.

To adapt Churchill (possibly) for the kitchen: good preparation is at the 
heart of a successful eggs benedict: and that starts with choosing your eggs.

“What we have to do before we even begin cooking,” Delia writes, “is to try to 
understand what eggs are and how they work.” And the trick to understanding 
eggs is to understand that they are not a food, but a birthplace, designed not 
to provide a handy kitchen staple but to bring more chickens into the world.

To keep the chick going while it’s in there, there’s a tiny little air pocket 
within the egg’s shell. This pocket is great news if you are a chick but 
terrible news if your eggs are anything less than fresh, as the longer the egg 
is left, the bigger the pocket gets, drying out the eggs and making it harder 
to separate the white from the yolk – and making poaching next to impossible.

The trick to understanding eggs is to understand that they are not a food, but 
a birthplace.

If your eggs are fresh, poaching them according to the Delia method is so easy 
you could get a monkey to do it, provided you had some way of cajoling the 
monkey into retrieving the poached egg after it had sat in hot water for 10 
minutes.

If your eggs are less than fresh, however, things can get a little tricky. 
Your eggs are just as likely to dissolve as they are to form successful poached 
eggs. The one piece of good news I have is this: if you cannot recall which one 
of the two boxes of eggs in your cupboard is the fresh one and it only becomes 
painfully clear that you have chosen the wrong box when the egg turns into mush 
the second it hits the water, don’t worry: the water itself will still serve 
perfectly well with a fresh egg.

Related: How I learned to make meringue with Delia | The Delia project 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/29/learn-to-cook-meringues-the-delia-project-stephen-bush>

Of course, there’s more to an eggs benedict than simply poaching an egg. The 
good news is, after not much practice, the time it takes to prepare the 
hollandaise sauce fits exactly into the amount of time you need to leave the 
poached egg in the hot water, meaning that all your ingredients should be nice 
and hot when you whack them on a muffin.

The bad news is, if you follow Delia’s instructions, unless you have a very, 
very, very steady hand, you will end up with not a nice, thick hollandaise 
sauce but something rather thinner. Unless you can get that melted butter in as 
steady a stream as possible, you will end up with a sauce that tastes like 
hollandaise, but certainly doesn’t look like it.

There are two solutions for this: the first is to add a teaspoon of cream to 
the mix, which gets you the right consistency but is a one-way road to heart 
failure. The second, more artery-friendly, way is to double the amount you put 
in of everything else, and add a teaspoon of cornflour. I graduated during the 
financial crisis, so, under the assumption that I won’t have a pension to 
collect should I live that long, I use cream. How’s that for financial planning?

That done, simply whack your poached egg on a piece of muffin alongside some 
pancetta, put it under the grill for a few seconds, and there you go. An eggs 
benedict worthy of any good cafe.

 * Stephen Bush is cooking his way through Delia’s Complete How To Cook (BBC 
Books, £40) in a year; @stephenkb 
 * You can watch Delia Smith’s free Online Cookery School videos at 
deliaonline.com <http://www.deliaonline.com/>; @DeliaOnline 
<https://twitter.com/deliaonline> 