
When I first arrived in England, in 1953, it was a gastronomic desert. If I 
wanted olive oil for a salad, I had to go to the chemist and buy 12 tiny 
bottles. It was used for syringing people's ears. The chemist thought I had a 
sick elephant at home. Nowadays, the English are daring and exciting with food. 
You can buy everything here and it's the same quality as France, sometimes 
better. The English have better bass, turbot, wild salmon and lobster, and 
Scottish beef is the world's best.

I start my day with two cups of strong coffee unless I'm going to Billingsgate 
Market. Then I'll be up at four to get my fish, see the remaining friends I 
have alive and working there and have a full English breakfast: fried potatoes, 
mushrooms, bangers, bacon, eggs. Lunch is usually light and involves business. 
I'll start with a simple crab salad and then a small roast; chicken or beef 
with all the extras and then good French cheese. I have a large dinner - 
shellfish, such as scallops, and then rack of lamb, and something like English 
cherries to finish.

I also adore moules et frites. Who doesn't like mussels? They're cheap, 
healthy and better than lobster. But you must have them with thick mayonnaise. 
It's very bad for you but so very good. My greatest extravagances are 
champagne, butter, cream - and women. I am a womaniser and I eat mountains of 
butter. I also put clotted cream on my strawberries and scones. I do drink, but 
not like the English. To enjoy life to the full it's wise to avoid excess. But 
it doesn't stop me from demolishing a bottle of champagne a day. And a bottle 
of good wine, with a meal.

I grew up during the war when food was scarce. My father was fighting Germans 
in the woods while my mother was making meals from very few, very simple 
ingredients. Steaming hot plates of calves' hearts with rice and lots of boiled 
beef, using the cheap bit, the brisket. Everything was cooked very slowly. It 
was incredibly filling and kept us going. I learnt a lot from my mother. She 
used innards, saying they made a noble dish. A favourite of mine was her 
chicken-feet stew. Now we throw away giblets. But Michel [his son, the chef 
Michel Roux Jr] always serves a traditional dish made of innards, the skirt or 
brisket, for lunch at Le Gavroche.

I have houses in Hyde Park and Lingfield, where I am most weekends. Half of 
the year I'm in the States. A lot of Americans are obese but a small proportion 
eat well. The English, though, are quick learners, work hard and understand 
food. It's amazing how much they've learnt about food since I arrived. Why else 
would I live here?

Mussels

I always like to see fish or seafood in someone's basket, and mussels provide 
Albert with useful amounts of omega-3 fats that are believed to be good for the 
brain.

Rack of lamb

Another good source of monounsaturated fat. But Albert's diet is a bit heavy 
in animal-derived fare and light on vegetable matter. More fruit and veg would 
not go amiss.

Butter

Butter's high saturated-fat content usually gets it blacklisted, but I don't 
think there's much evidence that animal fat is bad for you. Plus, a fair 
proportion of butter is relatively healthy monounsaturated fat (as in olive 
oil).

Cream

Like butter, cream is often vilified on account of its saturated fat and 
cholesterol content, but this view isn't supported by scientific evidence.

Strong coffee

Traditionally given a bad press, recent evidence seems to show that, in 
moderation, coffee may actually be good for you. It's certainly not going to 
kill you.

French cheese

Replacing his cheese with fruit on some days would help Albert balance his 
diet. Or he could add some apple or pear to this course.

Champagne

The 'benefits' of alcohol have recently been overstated, and Albert's intake 
could be regarded as excessive. I'd advise drinking a glass of water with every 
one of wine.
