
The school at the centre of the Trojan horse scandal has been given a clean 
bill of health byOfsted <http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> 
inspectors, two years after allegations of an Islamist plot to infiltrate 
education made national headlines.

Rockwood Academy, formerly known as Park View, a state secondary school in 
Alum Rock, eastBirmingham <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham>, has been 
upgraded to “good” by Ofsted following a visit by its inspectors, ending a long 
period of upheaval for pupils and staff.

Inspectors praised the “passion and determination” of the school’s new 
leadership and said Adrian Packer, the executive head brought in after the 
previous trustees were ousted by the Department for Education (DfE), had 
“worked relentlessly and with great resilience to tackle the wide-ranging 
failures” highlighted in previous inspections.

“Pupils at Rockwood Academy <http://www.rockwood-academy.co.uk/> are now 
experiencing a suitably broad education that ensures they are well prepared for 
life in modern Britain,” the latest Ofsted report will say.

Park View and other schools made headlines in 2014 when its chair of governors 
was named in the mysterious Trojan horse letter as part of an alleged Islamist 
plot to dominate schools in Birmingham with a majority of Muslim pupils, 
setting off a series of investigations.

Related: Trojan horse school damned in Ofsted report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jun/06/trojan-horse-school-ofsted-report-park-view>

Ofsted downgraded Park View – which had previously been praised by the chief 
inspector Sir Michael Wilshaw 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/mar/27/michael-wilshaw-ofsted-school-inspector>
 – from outstanding to inadequate, and placed it in special measures, with 
inspectors reporting that the school was failing to protect pupils from 
possible exposure to extremism.

While the allegations of a city-wide plot were never substantiated and are 
thought to have been a hoax, investigations by the DfE and Ofsted criticised 
Park View for poor safeguarding and claims of segregation of boys and girls 
during PE and religious studies.

Packer said he was delighted by Ofsted’s report. “We never had a plan B, so 
I’m naturally pleased plan A worked so well,” he said. “When I arrived in 
September 2014, I insisted we would only ever look forward. At that time, the 
trust and the schools were in chaos. I was overwhelmed by the complexity of the 
challenges but was always encouraged and inspired by the children, who showed 
remarkable resilience.”

The latest inspection report praises the school for its “rigorous training” in 
child protection given to staff. “Pupils are taught how to keep safe; 
fundamental British values are promoted highly effectively,” the inspectors 
wrote.

“Powerful partnerships with other organisations provide a range of 
opportunities to further enrich pupils’ spiritual, moral, cultural and social 
development.

“Innovative project work and initiatives facilitated through these 
partnerships have enabled pupils to explore in depth such issues as the dangers 
of radicalisation and extremism, the impact of the Holocaust and anti-semitism, 
and equal opportunities, including those related to sexuality and gender.”

Nansen primary school, part of the same trust responsible for Rockwood, also 
improved from inadequate to good.

The improved Ofsted ratings at both schools would make it easier to attract 
new teachers, said Packer, who as executive head has responsibilities at both 
Rockwood and Nansen.

Related: Trojan Horse school hit by shortage of teachers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/08/trojan-horse-school-teacher-shortage-birmingham>

“There was a time when no one wanted to work for us. I often doubted why I 
took the risk myself,” he said. “My many sleepless nights involved lots of 
soul-searching and creative thinking of how to make these schools a place 
people would want to work in.

“By developing strong partnerships, we created security and confidence. 
Eventually, we were able to attract fantastic leaders who in turn attracted 
other high-quality staff. The schools are now brimming with enthusiastic, 
talented and committed staff who are proud to be making such an important 
difference.”

The school’s GCSE results remain below the heights achieved under the previous 
management, when the school topped national lists for improved attainment. But 
the Ofsted report notes: “Given the turbulence in staffing last academic year, 
pupils’ academic achievements were remarkable.”
