
Last year, after four years, I finally completed my doctorate. I was 48 years 
old. I started it because I was looking for an intellectual challenge while 
bringing up my children in a remote area. I had been feeling disconnected and 
my research gave me a focus. But the impact on my family, both financial and 
emotional, is something that I’m still trying to reconcile.


My research involved analysing arguments about how we understand our 
relationship with the rest of existence. I came to the conclusion that we do 
not, in fact, direct our own lives. We’re all a mesh of conditions and 
circumstances, and the myth that we are free to choose is an ideological trick 
for meting out praise and punishment.

I have a good Scottish education to thank for my interest in questioning 
things. Growing up, I developed an interest in what makes a good society, a 
good life, a good person, especially when you’re not referring to God for 
adjudication. In my thesis, I argue that all we have control over is how we 
respond to situations.

When I started writing, I had spent 17 years living in the west of Ireland. 
This is not as romantic as it sounds (although there are occasional moments of 
searing beauty). We moved here for family reasons and I found it tough to find 
interesting or lucrative work, so I had to find a way to respond.

I knew that pursuing academic work was selfish, that it would eat into the 
attention I gave my children and my husband. But the alternative was worse: I 
was becoming hollowed out by my frustration. I began an Open University 
postgraduate course because I could fit it in between other work, and 
afterwards I applied to do aPhD 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd>.

I had doubts about my capacity to undertake the rigorous requirements of 
doctoral scholarship but I slowly began to build my confidence. It was 
time-consuming – I often looked out of the window at my children passing by on 
their way to some event and knew I would never have this time again. I cannot 
calculate the sacrifices I forced them to make. We were poor and my studying 
made us poorer. We lived in a remote place and my isolation as an academic made 
us remoter still.

“I know! You’re writing!” my son would shout in exasperation if he’d asked me 
for something and I’d hesitated in reply. My daughter was more diffident but I 
could see that it affected her too. The pressure to meet deadlines meant that 
we had to cut down on the idle hours spent watching television together. I 
approached homework with military efficiency and found myself becoming 
impatient when there were issues to discuss.

But my children also saw me being strong and resilient, showing them that some 
things, however difficult, are worth pursuing, regardless of the financial or 
other rewards. I hope they saw, in the dire straits that we found ourselves in, 
an example of grit and determination. I was honest with them about what I was 
doing, and why. I hope that my honesty taught them about courage and 
independence.


My marriage has suffered too, possibly irreparably, but I still love my 
husband and will be forever grateful for the enormous sacrifices he made to 
enable me to study.

So I completed my PhD, but I had no money to attend the conferral ceremony. I 
would dearly have loved to have gone, and to have taken my husband and children 
along. We managed to raise a glass to one another nevertheless.


I hoped that finishing the PhD would cause something fundamental to change, 
and it did. Although I still felt guilty, I began to feel that what I had done 
would serve some purpose.

My children are adventurous and brave, and it is some consolation to think 
that this may have something to do with the combination of the stability 
offered by their father, and my love of learning.


I cannot regret the experience, even though the cost was enormous. The choice 
I faced was between reacting to circumstance in an unthinking blind rage 
against the system, or the stepping back that a cool academic overview allowed. 
I chose the latter, and that has made possibilities arise exponentially.


Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
