
A district judge who is suing the Ministry of Justice after whistleblowing her 
complaints about courtroom dangers – death threats, violent claimants and 
hostage-taking – has spoken out for the first time about her experience of an 
under-resourced justice system.


The challenge mounted by Claire Gilham, formerly deputy director of the 
Independent Police Complaints Commission, highlights the position of judges who 
– because they are deemed not to be workers – are exempt from certain 
employment protections.


Her case is now understood to be before the justice secretary, Michael Gove 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, and is being appealed to the 
upper employment tribunal. Her experience of the worst strains inside the 
family court system reflect wider concerns about the pressure imposed by an 
influx of unrepresented claimants.


Gilham, 57, was appointed a full-time district judge in 2006 and transferred 
to Warrington county court in 2009. Two years later, Runcorn county court was 
closed as part of an MoJ austerity drive and its work transferred to Warrington.


Gilham wrote to a senior judge expressing concern about lack of appropriate 
courtroom accommodation, the impact on district judges’ workloads and dangers 
for judges and court staff.


Gilham believes her complaints should be covered by whistleblowing protections 
but instead said it resulted in her being bullied, overworked and put under 
additional stress. She eventually suffered a nervous breakdown and has not 
returned to court since 2013.

Court closures and mergers coincided with cuts to legal aid. Fewer claimants 
in family cases were entitled to be represented by a solicitor. “[The cuts] 
fell disproportionately on areas of social stress,” Gilham said.


“When they closed Runcorn court, they promised the resources but they didn’t 
[appear]. The big inner city courts were protected; they didn’t look at the 
needs of the court user but the needs of professionals.


“I was working longer hours and had a larger caseload. I was booked up solid 
for cases three months ahead; I was under constant stress.” Staff at 
Warrington, she said, organised a vote of no confidence in the courts and 
tribunals service, HMCTS.


Related: Top judge says justice system is now unaffordable to most 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/13/uk-most-senior-judge-says-justice-has-become-unaffordable-to-most>

“When they merged the court they cut back staff. There wasn’t any physical 
space. One person walked into my four-metre-square office [where cases were 
also heard] and launched herself at me; she had to be restrained. The hearing 
continued with her suspended in the air.”

Gilham requested better courtroom accommodation but was turned down. “I asked 
for my own room to be reconfigured because the door was behind the [claimants 
so she could not get out]. I was under a great deal of stress and feeling at 
risk.


“Many cases involved drugs and domestic violence. I was contacted by the 
police who said someone had a settled intention to kill me.” There were 
concerns he could smuggle in a ceramic knife unnoticed through the security 
scanner.


“He knew how to get into my room. I was off sick for a time. The police came 
and put a protection plan in place for my home but there was no risk plan for 
work.”


Gilham said there was occasionally hostage-taking inside the courts when 
family cases erupted into angry disputes. Once she had to hide in a locked 
court room because someone accused of domestic violence was loose in the 
building.


“We often sat late [because of the caseload], once until 10pm. We had to get 
through the case. You have to engage with people.”


Earlier this month the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, in his 
annual report to parliament 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/13/uk-most-senior-judge-says-justice-has-become-unaffordable-to-most>
 pointed out that “there has been a considerable increase of litigants in 
person for whom our current court system is not really designed”.


Thomas, the head of the judiciary in England and Wales, added that judges felt 
their burden of work had grown and “are having to handle an ever-increasing 
quantity of challenging and emotionally charged cases in family and crime … ”


Gilham was on call at weekends and sometimes had to come into court to 
sentence for breaches of injunctions. She had to work through her lunch hours 
because there was no other time to draft judgments.

The majority of family cases are dealt with by county court judges. “Workloads 
are uneven,” Gilham observed. “The higher courts are heavily resourced and 
people who do that work are protected.


“I would be dealing with sexual abuse cases in my room and sometimes there 
wouldn’t be a lawyer. I’d be unaccompanied [apart from the warring couple]. You 
learn to deliver judgments in half an hour. It’s extremely stressful.


Related: Number of female applicants for QC still stubbornly low, selectors say
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/11/female-applicants-qc-queens-counsel-stubbornly-low-selectors>

“Although judges are not employees, they have terms and conditions which 
include obeying management. They started issuing instructions which were more 
detailed and directing how we should deal with cases.”


Gilham demanded to see evidence on renewal of interim care orders because she 
was aware of past mistakes. She insisted on seeing evidence. “There was a 
danger of miscarriages of justice. I was told I had no discretion but to accept 
an email. So I defied them.


“Care orders are not routine. Every time we had to renew a care order, we had 
to have a certificate that it had been agreed. I was being asked to renew 
orders where there had been no certificate and I wouldn’t. I was told I was 
unreasonable and difficult … but judicial independence was being undermined.”


Her legal claim – for disability discrimination and denial of her 
whistleblowing rights – highlights the lack of resources in the court system 
where “to preserve measurable performance” some staff indulge in “hiding 
letters in cupboards to avoid dealing with them or not attempting to place 
documents in files”.


Gilham’s claim – drawn up by her solicitor, Emilie Cole, a partner at the law 
firm Bindmans – says she was “seriously overworked as a result of the failure 
to ensure there was sufficient cover for district judges and other judges to 
hear the cases set out in listings following the [courts] merger”.


It asserts that she should be considered a normal worker because the 
relationship between a judge and the MoJ involves a “mutuality of obligation” 
and is effectively contractual.


Under the 1996 Employment Rights Act, workers are entitled “not to be 
subjected to any detriment by any act, or any deliberate failure to act, by his 
employer done on the ground that the worker has made a [whistleblowing] 
protected disclosure”.


Gilham told HMCTS that there had to be changes. “But the changes didn’t 
happen,” she recalled. “I felt very much forced out. I came off sick in 2013.


“They are now threatening to take away my pension for bringing the judiciary 
into disrepute,” she told the Guardian. “I can’t walk away from all this 
without there being some change.


“The [MoJ] has relied for too long on the idea that a courtroom includes a 
dock and that there’s always people around, but that’s not how it is these 
days.”


Although Gilham’s experiences may sound extreme, many judges have experienced 
threats and assaults. In 2013, the MoJ confirmed that there had been26 
incidents in the previous year of attacks 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/feb/27/judges-threatened-abused-family-courts>
, attempted assaults or threatening letters directed at judges mainly in family 
courts.

Last December, the Ministry of Justice released figures, asked for by the 
Labour shadow justice minister, Andy Slaughter, showingnearly 7,000 knives were 
confiscated in magistrates courts 
<http://www.parliament.uk/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/commons/2015-12-07/18874>
 in England and Wales last year. Warrington county court is one of those now 
facing closure in the latest round of cuts.

The MoJ denies that Gilham has been subject to disability discrimination or 
suffered through her whistleblowing. An MoJ spokesperson said: “There are 
robust security and safety measures in place to protect judges and everyone 
else who attends court. These include mandatory bag searches, the use of modern 
searching equipment and surveillance cameras, as well as security officers with 
the powers to restrain and remove people from the building should there be a 
need.”

The spokesperson added: “Judges are not in a contractual relationship with the 
MoJ but hold office on appointment by Her Majesty, the lord chancellor [justice 
secretary Michael Gove] or the lord chief justice. This stems from the 
executive having no control or direction over judicial office holders in 
certain fundamental areas, most clearly in relationship to how particular cases 
are decided. The circumstances under which judges can be removed from office 
are restricted by legislation. The lord chancellor and lord chief justice make 
sure policies are in place to protect the welfare of judicial office holders.”
