 "I suppose you'll have to park yourself there," says Mike, pointing at a dusty 
sliver of concrete. "If there are too many cars around, the place starts 
looking like a travellers' camp."
 It's 4.30, the light is fading, but there's still work going on at Tinker's 
Bubble. Most of the community is busy picking up windfall apples, sorting, 
polishing and putting them in boxes to sell. This, after all, is Somerset. Next 
to the orchard, Simon and Chris are hammering pieces of old corrugated iron 
into a half-built barn. The council won't let them build a permanent structure, 
so they've bound it together with string.

 About 12 people live at Tinker's Bubble. The 40-acre site includes an 
orchard, stream and pine forest - but no houses as such. Nor do residents have 
the luxury of electricity, central heating, or loos that flush. When it rains, 
the "village" gets muddy; at this time of year, temperatures plummet. Mike, my 
host, warns me about this on the telephone. "Bring a hot-water bottle, a 
sleeping bag, wellies, duvet, torch. And plenty of socks."

 The heart of the Bubble is hidden behind a canopy of pine trees. It's quite a 
walk from the orchard, past the goats, the cider house and up a hill. "We moved 
here in 1994," says Mike, leading the way. "There was nothing apart from the 
views, the apples and the rats. Even walking up here was difficult when it 
rained because you couldn't get a grip on the soil. Now we've got these logs 
down to act as steps. That first winter was a hard one. It's luxurious in 
comparison now."

 As the forest floor levels into a plateau, half a dozen or so grimy canvas 
tents come into view. One of the local authority's stipulations was that the 
community should be hidden from sight, leaving the landscape unblemished. 
That's why the Bubble is hidden in the forest, rather than on the more 
accessible plain below.

 The tents are grouped around a wooden roundhouse where visitors sleep and the 
cooking is done. Outside, next to a small campfire, is the washing-up area. The 
open kitchen units are built from logs. There is a sink, a place to stack dirty 
dishes, and racks for clean plates and mugs. When it rains, the crockery 
invariably ends up covered in a fine layer of pine needles. "Supper'll be ready 
at 5.30," someone shouts. Mike doesn't look happy. "It's too early to eat," he 
says quietly. "It's all right for the children, but we've only just finished 
working and I don't really like eating at this time."

 For outsiders, this is the nub of communal living: you give up the right to 
do things when you want to do them. If Mike was on cooking duty, he could have 
scheduled supper a little later. But he's on apples today and so the timing is 
beyond his control. "Come on," he says to me calmly. "I'll show you my bender, 
where you'll be spending the night."

 He opens a flap to a semi-circular frame tent and ushers me into his home. 
Made of hazel and covered with heavy-duty tarpaulin, the twigloo, as it is 
sometimes known, contains all the 56-year-old's worldly belongings: his 
letters, clothes, tools and collection of New Scientist magazines.

 Mike lights a lantern. "It's got everything I need," he says. "It's 
surprising how much you can live without." The 15ft bender is divided into 
three areas: a mattress on pallets serves as the bedroom; a desk, a straw chair 
and a rocking chair make up the living room; then, there is a small sink and a 
wood stove in a workshop area. It has windows and, in places, is high enough to 
stand up in.

 "Would you like a sherry?" asks Mike. "It's a cream. Very nice, actually." He 
pours one into a half-pint glass, the other into a mug. Wearing a tweedy 
jacket, corduroys, wellington boots and a woolly hat, he is thin, sinewy 
strong, and looks older than his years.

 Mike is not a hippie. He says the flower power thing passed him by. He has 
chosen to live communally for different reasons. "When I heard Tinker's Bubble 
was starting, I was living in a bedsit, staring at the four walls," he says in 
his crisp John Mills English. "I had no opportunities to express myself. Here, 
I have space and freedom. It was a very easy choice to make."

 "Everyone has different reasons for being here. I used to be a Third World 
volunteer and I want to go back to it some day, but with a clean conscience. I 
couldn't lecture people on sustainable living without practising what I 
preached. We all have to do our part, and it's a great privilege being here."

 Not everyone would understand Mike's concept of privilege. He lives without 
many of the things we take for granted. "As long as I've got food and my 
wonderful views, I'll be all right," he says. "Come on, let's get something to 
eat before it goes cold."

 Supper is eaten around the open fire. The Bubblers eat only vegetarian food. 
Tonight's dish - a bean and leek stew - rests on the grate in a large, 
smoke-blackened pot. The meal has gone slightly cold. Since there is no 
microwave, Mike pours boiling water over it, making the stew more like soup. No 
one takes much notice of me. They talk about the apples, about dinner, about 
the new barn. Occasionally, they move the tree-stump seats as the wind changes 
direction and eye-watering smoke blows into a face. On one seat change, Bob, a 
gracefully ageing hippie who loves the land and tends towards apocalyptic 
visions of the future, finds himself next to me. He explains how Tinker's 
Bubble came into being.

 "I was looking for a little plot to grow vegetables on. I knew this farmer 
wanted to sell some land, but I didn't realise he meant this much. Obviously, I 
didn't have the sort of money he wanted, but I knew people from the 
road-protest movement who were interested in starting up a community.

 "We eventually paid £50,000 for the land, and sold 25 shares at £2,000 apiece 
to pay for it. Not everyone who owns a share lives here. People have houses and 
jobs elsewhere. They come at weekends and help out. It's better that way. Not 
too crowded."

 Apart from the shareholders, the Bubble has its fair share of visitors. "I 
suppose with some people we've got a reputation of being a fascist work camp," 
says Bob. "We don't like people dropping in and just lazing around. This place 
is all about sustainable living, and that means there is a lot of work to do. 
Not everyone likes that."

 Bar one woman, most of the live-in shareholders are usually men. Often, there 
are no children at the camp. Currently, two of the female visitors have 
children. This extra responsibility can cause resentment. Apart from cooking, 
which is shared equally, each individual must do community work on the land all 
day Monday and Tuesday - including those with children.

 Hazel, a visiting mother who would like to settle at the Bubble, says this 
can cause problems. "I look after the children myself, and it is difficult 
trying to fit that in while doing other work. I've got this virus at the moment 
and I can't do too much, which makes me feel guilty because I'm a burden on the 
others. Ideally, I would prefer to do lots of cooking because at least I'd be 
in the roundhouse with the children."

 Community life is like family life, but with a lot more aggravation. Instead 
of the usual arguments about whose turn it is to do the washing-up, there are 
disputes over how each task should be carried out and how the workload is 
divided. Invariably, the older members win - on the grounds that "this is how 
we've always done things".

 Since no one is in charge and no single view prevails, it doesn't always 
work. And if somebody doesn't abide by the community ethos, it can prove 
difficult to remove them. Bob, Mike and the others start talking about the 
visitors from hell. It is a favourite topic of conversation. "They would stay 
in bed all morning," they moan. "They let their kids run wild."

 One by one, the campfire gathering unburdens its complaints and retires. It 
is only 9.30, but without television or electric light for reading, most people 
go to bed early because there is always a busy day ahead.

 Mike's bender is surprisingly warm. He has had the wood stove going all 
evening, but says it is a waste of resources to keep it burning all night. I 
get into the sleeping bag wearing all my clothes, plus an extra pair of socks. 
I tell Mike it's just like camping without the reassurance of knowing when you 
are going home. "It's much more comfortable than camping," he insists. "You get 
to understand the body's natural rhythms. For example, if you slept in your 
sleeping bag naked, you'd be much warmer than with all those clothes." I opt to 
remain in my Michelin layers and try to sleep, listening to the wind howling 
outside.

 Mike gets up early. By the time I step outside at 7.15, most people have had 
their breakfast and are set for the day's work. It doesn't take long to get 
ready at the Bubble in the mornings. There is no queue for the bathroom - a 
wooden hut with a bath and water pumped from a well at the foot of the hill - 
or for the "shit pit", a three-sided tent with a wooden toilet seat on the 
forest floor that covers a big hole in the ground.

 The Bubblers set to work: in the orchard, tending the vegetables, building 
the barn and making cider. They have bread and jam for lunch, and another day 
soon passes.

 A young boy with glistening net wings attached to his back, runs past. 
"Birthday, birthday, Mummy's birthday!" he shouts. "I'm a fairy going to the 
fairy party. Are you fairies as well?" Tepee Valley is all abuzz. It's a 
fortieth birthday party and everyone is gathered around the fire in the Big 
Lodge. The party is in full swing. There are crisps and cake, little animals 
made from clothes pegs for the children, and lots of wine.

 In the corner, a heavily pregnant young woman plays the flute, her blouse 
open to the waist to show her swollen belly. Next to her, her partner plays 
folk songs on his violin. Another woman wears a garland of oak leaves and a 
sheepskin cloak.

 Deep in the Welsh countryside, 100 people are following the ways of the North 
American Indians. Living in pointed tepees (or the flatter yurt tents), they 
eschew formal organisations and decisions. Since 1976, the community has 
attracted many people to its alternative, eco-based lifestyle, which includes 
"communing" in Indian-style sweat lodges and living off the land. Children have 
grown up there, left and now resettled to bring up children of their own. 
Unlike Tinker's Bubble, the Valley has no work structures. If you want to spend 
a week building a stone circle, no one stops you.

 Rick has lived at Tepee Valley since 1979. He used to be in a relationship 
with the birthday woman, but they've split up; their children still live in his 
tepee. He is wearing part of a jester's costume and a baggy white shirt for the 
party. His hair and beard are comfortably unkempt, and he is happy to admit to 
still being a flower child at heart.

 "Of course I'm a hippie," he says. "I believe in fellow men living 
harmoniously with nature. That's why I'm here. To fulfil my ideals. People have 
lived in tepees like this for thousands of years. It is a nomadic way of life 
that doesn't use up too many of the earth's resources. Every season we move our 
tepees, so the grass has a chance to replenish itself. We are living alongside 
nature."

 In the world outside Tepee Valley, Rick is known by another name: the Rev 
Richard Mayes. As an Anglican curate preaching in Southend-on-Sea, he achieved 
notoriety as a swinging vicar in the mid-1970s when he was jailed for smoking 
pot.

 "I spent six months in prison," he says in his soft lilt. "I vowed it would 
be the last house I ever lived in. I moved here to be in touch with life's 
natural rhythms. I still believe in Christ, but I also believe in paganism. I 
haven't dropped out. I've dropped in. I'm doing what I believe in."

 Not everyone at the Valley is as welcoming as Rick the Vic. One man is 
adamant that I shouldn't talk to anyone. "There are lots of people here who 
don't want anything to do with you," he spits. "If you try interviewing them, I 
guarantee they'll hit you. We don't have to explain ourselves to journalists or 
anyone."

 Ros is less fierce: "Of course you can have a look round my yurt. No harm in 
that." She prefers to be known as Ros Bringha, a Celtic fire goddess, rather 
than Ros Foskett, the slightly less exciting name she was born with. At 44, she 
is one of the village's wise women: she listens to people's problems and plays 
with their children.

 Her yurt - a geometric construction smaller and warmer than a tepee - is 
meticulously organised. A layer of rushes, natural damp-proofing, is laid on 
the floor, then covered with rugs and sheepskins. Dishes are stacked neatly in 
the kitchen area, vegetables sit in a wicker basket Country Living-style, and a 
range of herbal teas is displayed on a log shelf. There is a bookcase, and logs 
ready for the stove are in another basket.

 A condor's feather hangs from a hazel beam and a badger skin, preserved and 
skinned by Ros herself, rests next to the wood stove.

 "We really do our own thing here," she says, swinging her long plaits away 
from her face. "We only get together when we want to. There are no rules as 
such. I'm here because it meets my alternative values, which living in a house 
wouldn't do. I need to be outside on the land. Houses are about restraint. They 
destroy our natural instincts. Tepee Valley is about a spiritual 
coming-together of like-minded people."

 "It's not all light and fun. We have to carry our shopping for nearly a mile 
across fields, which can be hard going in the winter. And we have to fetch all 
our own water from a well, but it just makes you more careful with the natural 
resources."

 Most of Tepee Valley's children are taught at home. Those who opt for formal 
education do so because they really want to. The rest are taught by their 
parents, although at GCSE stage they are normally sent to school to gain formal 
qualifications.

 "We've had hundreds of people pass through here over the years," says Rick. 
"Most don't stay, but those of us who do must have something in common, 
otherwise we wouldn't keep going."

 Hundreds of miles away, in the tame heartland of Suffolk's Constable country, 
is Old Hall. This 18th-century manor house, convent and, latterly, Franciscan 
friary is home to 40 adults and 20 children. Although an alternative community, 
it is closer to the way most of us live: indoors. The building is vast, 
covering two acres, and grand. It is divided into family-sized and individual 
units. Prospective members have to pay handsomely to buy their way into The 
Good Life. Singletons have to find about £11,000, while families need £60,000 - 
in cash, because building societies don't give mortgages on shared 
accommodation. As a result, Old Hall is overwhelmingly middle class and 
middle-aged. Once in, though, the cost of living is cheap. A family of four can 
keep its costs down to about £450 a month.

 "Come in. Would you like some tea and cake? Or do you want to wait until 
lunch-time?" says Rosalind Barr, my sponsor. I am her responsibility for the 
day. It is up to her to point out the positive aspects of Old Hall.

 The community is very keen to give the right impression - and it is very keen 
on structures, on meetings, on giving everyone their say. Decision-making is by 
consensus. Whether it is painting a hallway or buying ferrets, every member has 
to give his or her approval: which means it can take a long time to get things 
done.

 Ian is on lunch duty. He is preparing apple and peanut soup, sweet corn and 
cheese on toast. "It's not that daunting cooking for so many people," he 
insists. "We have an industrial cooking range and catering-size pots. You get 
used to it quickly. We have a microwave, which helps. The only thing that's a 
pain is chips. But we only do them as a treat for the kids every now and then."

 Residents do three jobs a week - totalling 15 hours - which they choose from 
the rota themselves. This week, Ian will do one cooking duty and two days of 
emptying bins. Rosalind is on "start the day" and will cook one evening meal. 
If washing-up is your thing, you can opt to do that full-time, or make bread, 
tidy up or take the compost out.

 Members who don't do their fair share of rota jobs are the cause of 
complaints at weekly Friday meetings: "It's where we have our little grumble," 
someone explains.

 Apart from domestic duties, everyone takes a share in looking after their 
beautiful 70 acres of prime countryside. There is a cow group, a sheep group, a 
chicken group and a carrot group. Rosalind is in the cow group. "I just like 
cows," she says. "We take responsibility for them. We milk them, decide if we 
will buy or sell them. It's fun."

 Apart from the groups and the weekly meetings, there are "conveners" for 
land, energy, building maintenance, domestic and social events. "I know we have 
a lot of meetings, but not everyone attends them," says Rosalind. "Sometimes, 
we just have meetings about meetings. It doesn't suit everyone, but it's the 
way we do things here. I didn't make up the rules."

 Dead on 12.30, Ian rings the chapel bell for lunch. The community members 
make their way to the wooden refectory, where they sit at long, school-style 
tables and chat. Not everyone gets on. As one man starts to articulate his take 
on communal living, another whispers to me, "Ignore him, he's always going on."

 Rosalind, the model of politeness, says nothing, but later admits: "You'll 
always have lots of strong personalities in places like this. That's why 
they've opted out of so-called ordinary living. You get on as best you can and 
ignore those you don't get on with."

 "This is a pragmatic place," says John, who at 68 is comfortably classed as a 
community elder. "We are not driven by ideology or religion, although it's a 
shame we aren't more radical. I would like to see solar panels, for instance. I 
see this place as an antidote to individualism. It's not easy living with lots 
of people, and we've all had the urge to leave, but you learn to become more 
tolerant." In the past, communal living has been a byword for sexual 
experimentation. But no longer. "We've been around a long time now," says one 
member, "and most things have been tried at Old Hall. People interested in that 
sort of thing soon left. I would not say there were any more sexual affairs 
here than anywhere else."

 After lunch, Rosalind and her husband Fabio take me for a stroll around the 
grounds - through the vegetable garden, with its radicchio, asparagus and 
sorrel; beyond the family-sized sauna; and past the straw house and the boat 
docked on dry land for the children to play on. In the thin winter sun, Old 
Hall looks idyllic.

 "You can see why we gave up living in a cramped house in London," says 
Rosalind, pointing at the manor house. "All this space. All this freedom. You 
would have to be a millionaire to live somewhere like this."
