
Where has my sexual desire gone, and how do I get it back?

Sexual desire is normal for most people. The urge itself is a complex 
combination of intellectual ideas and fantasies. It is usually connected to a 
physiological response, but one that can theoretically be separated – for 
instance, one’s body may become aroused in the presence of someone with whom it 
would be inappropriate to have sex. The mental wish for sex – either a specific 
enthusiasm to be erotically connected with another being, a desire to 
masturbate or a more general longing without a particular object – can precede, 
follow or be simultaneous with actual physiological arousal.

Sometimes a person who is able to become physiologically aroused in the normal 
way develops an inability to feel comfortable with the idea of having sex. 
Anxiety, stress, depression, overwork, bereavement and anger can curb one’s 
interest, and a traumatic event may lead to an aversion to sex. The treatment 
for a problem with desire is related to the cause. In simple cases, a couple 
can work to reduce their stress or anxiety, improve their connection – which 
often requires solving specific problems that may be causing underlying 
resentment – or find “quality time” to be intimate. More complex cases usually 
require professional guidance to help a person heal from a specific trauma, 
treat sexual aversion or tackle phobias that may not be specific to sex, but 
may strongly influence sexual desire, such as a fear of germs. They can also 
help when people have what they believe to be an excess of desire that is 
causing significant life problems.

Why am I having problems getting aroused? I want to have sex!

Arousal is the initial bodily response to sexual desire and the physical 
events that prepare it for sex. In men, the most obvious sign is erection, 
while women normally experience vaginal opening and lubrication, but both can 
also experience flushed skin, changes in breathing patterns and hardening of 
the nipples. Both men and women can have difficulty becoming physically 
aroused, even when they desire it. Men can have difficulties achieving or 
maintaining an erection that is sufficient for their preferred type of sexual 
activity, and women can experience a lack of vaginal preparedness. The reasons 
can be largely physiological or largely psychological, but are most often a 
combination of the two.

Arousal failures can occur naturally and normally and are nothing to be 
concerned about. However, when they become frequent – and cause distress and 
relationship problems – they can usually be treated. Indeed, 
multimillion-dollar pharmaceutical industries are dedicated to treating arousal 
problems. However, they have mainly helped men with erectile dysfunction –
treating female arousal problems pharmacologically is still a work in progress 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/21/female-viagra-pill-lack-sexual-desire-not-dysfunction>
.

Erectile dysfunction can be caused by a number of medical conditions, such as 
vascular problems and diabetes. Psychologically, the same life and relationship 
events that lead to desire problems – stress, anxiety, work and money problems, 
emotional hurt and trauma – can also cause arousal difficulties, as can various 
strong fears – pregnancy, disease, punishment, being discarded. Shame, 
religious orthodoxy, illness and/or body image can also play a part. Finding 
the causes will lead to the correct treatment.

Why is it over too quickly – or does it go on too long? 

Orgasm can be elusive for some, while others may experience it more quickly 
than they, or their partners, wish. Anorgasmic people are often those who did 
not explore their bodies as children and teenagers and haven’t yet discovered 
how they work. They can usually be guided to catch up on this important 
process, although sometimes they are hampered by religious beliefs or early 
messages that sex, and touching one’s genitals, is dirty.

Some women who reach adulthood without ever experiencing orgasm may decide 
they are missing out on the When Harry Met Sally experience and seek help to 
achieve it, while others may consider it a defect and hide their difficulty 
through sexual avoidance or faking. Women’s orgasmic struggles are often based 
on their, or their partners’, lack of understanding that many – probably most – 
women do not achieve orgasm through vaginal penetration alone, but require 
direct clitoral stimulation.

Men who find it difficult to orgasm with a partner – or take too long – are 
often misunderstood, too. Since “lasting a long time” is typically prized, they 
can be characterised as sexual athletes instead of being recognised as people 
who never become sufficiently excited to climax. In many cases, they require 
more vigorous stimulation than can be provided during most forms of bodily 
penetration. Men who ejaculate “too quickly” usually seek treatment because of 
shame – or complaints from their partner. Professional help can teach them to 
recognise their point of ejaculatory inevitability and to control it.

Sex is painful. What should I do? 

People experience painful sex for all kinds of reasons, from the simple matter 
of trapped hair causing irritation to more serious conditions that require 
professional treatment. The common name for a sexual pain condition, usually 
referring to sexual pain during penetration, isdyspareunia 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/painful-intercourse/basics/definition/con-20033293>
. The most important thing to remember is that sex should never be painful; if 
it becomes so, it is not a good idea to continue.

Painful sexual conditions can sometimes be caused by other, medically 
significant problems that require professional diagnosis and treatment. These 
includelichen sclerosis 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/lichen-sclerosus/Pages/Introduction.aspx> (a skin 
condition that affects mainly the genital area) and problems related to 
circumcision. Another condition,Peyronies’s disease 
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/peyronies-disease/basics/definition/con-20028765>
, is caused by the formation of plaque (scar tissue) in the penile arteries and 
leads to painful erections and, in some cases, curvature of the penis. 
Dyspareunia can also be caused by a natural reduction in vaginal lubrication – 
a consequence of certain hormonal changes – that means the friction of 
penetration becomes unpleasant or painful. If a woman experiences this, she 
should stop immediately and ask for (or provide) additional clitoral 
stimulation that may increase her readiness for penetration, or change to 
non-penetrative erotic activity. If a woman continues to allow painful sex to 
occur, she may developvaginismus 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Vaginismus/Pages/Treatment.aspx>, a spasming of 
the vaginal muscles that makes penetration impossible. This is a fine example 
of the body protecting itself.

How will my partner’s medical condition affect our sex life? 

Since sexual arousal and orgasm involve physical processes such as blood flow, 
hormonal interaction and muscular tension, it stands to reason that any 
conditions affecting such processes – or any other relevant physiological 
systems – may affect a person’s sexual responses. Certain medications, too – 
either prescribed or over-the-counter – can affect sexual responses. But where 
there is willingness or desire to continue sexual activity despite a temporary 
or permanent medical condition or disability, there is usually a way. Despite 
common misconceptions – even among medical professionals – people often remain 
sexually interested in the face of severe illness or disability.

However, psychological issues can arise between partners when one, say, 
becomes a caretaker to the other. Without help and understanding, this can 
affect their sexual connection. Sometimes there is a simple solution to changes 
in one partner’s physical status – such as being open to changing their usual 
pattern and trying new positions or new styles of lovemaking. In many cases, 
adaption is vital – for example, being sexual at times when pain medication is 
providing optimum relief or using heat pads in appropriate places. It is most 
important that the person struggling with illness or disability feels their 
wishes regarding sexuality are being heard, and that those around them try to 
be accommodating – even if they believe there are more important priorities. 
Sexuality – or the lack of it – can truly affect a person’s quality of life, 
and the right to give and receive sexual pleasure should be upheld.

Am I too old for sex? 

Common mythology suggests that sexual failure of one kind or another is a 
natural consequence of ageing. This is untrue. Commonly, though, hormonal 
changes – and some illnesses or disabilities that can accompany ageing – affect 
or disrupt the sexual patterns enjoyed in one’s youth. Our society’s prejudice 
against sexuality among older people doesn’t help, and some people mistakenly 
accept one erectile failure, for example, as a sure sign of an age-related, 
downward spiral. As people begin to age, they tend to begin to prefer more 
direct genital stimulation, so this is a time to request more direct care and 
attention from a partner, or to provide it for one’s self. Men’s erections in 
older age may not be as upright as those of a 20-year-old, but this does not 
make them less proficient lovers; in fact, their experience, knowledge and 
better communication skills should make them far better. The arousal mechanism 
of vaginal lubrication may start to take a little longer, too, so women should 
ask for more oral sex time, longer caresses or whatever arouses them best. If 
penetration becomes painful due to insufficient lubrication, this is a sign 
that more arousal is necessary – and perhaps a tube of lubricant.

Some people become less self-conscious about their bodies as they age, but 
others become even more acutely aware of their looks. This can affect a 
person’s enjoyment of sex at any age. Hopefully, by the time someone reaches 
the point where they may need to adapt their style to accommodate medical or 
physical difficulties, their repertoire of sexual pleasures will be 
considerable. In old age, the unavailability of partners – and, indeed, 
negative societal views about seeking new partners – may make it difficult for 
a person to continue sexual activity in the way to which they are accustomed; 
however, many people find masturbation comforting and satisfying until the end 
of their days.

How often should we have sex?

The question of sexual frequency is a tricky one. Take a couple who have 
different requirements – James wants sex twice a day, while Joe wants it once a 
week. Joe is likely to label James “a sex addict”, while James may criticise 
Joe for what he considers “a low sex drive”. Such differences can be worked 
out, if not between themselves then with a little expert help. However, when a 
person is unable to resist the urge to have sex multiple times a day – even in 
inappropriate situations that can cause work, relationship or legal problems – 
or their genitals have become raw and damaged from masturbating twice an hour, 
or they are getting into trouble because of an uncontrollable fixation on 
internet porn, then they have a significant problem that requires treatment.

The brain architecture of people who struggle with such problems is usually 
generally compulsive or obsessive-compulsive, and not necessarily restricted to 
sexual behaviour, although eroticism may be the focus of expression for their 
disorder. Treatment by a professional is recommended; in fact, this is usually 
vital in order to protect the person from collateral life problems. Certain 
medication can help reduce compulsivity, as can certain forms of psychotherapy 
and targeted behavioural programmes. The seriousness of this particular 
sexually focused disorder must not be underestimated – it can have particularly 
grave consequences.

Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a patron of COSRT, the College of Sexual and 
Relationship Therapists. Helpful information on all these topics can be found at
cosrt.org.uk <http://www.cosrt.org.uk>
