
Occupational therapy (OT) can be a surprisingly diverse career – encompassing 
everything from brain injury rehab to end-of-life care.

Natasha Lockyer is an OT specialising in neurological conditions, 
predominantly those associated with brain injuries. She’s worked as a brain 
injury case manager in the private sector and now works as an OT and assistant 
director of services at brain injury charityHeadway East London 
<https://www.headway.org.uk/>. 

Lockyer runs therapeutic groups with Headway members, including a weekly arm 
therapy group, and she says: “I’m about to start another group exploring the 
cognitive difficulties most often experienced following a brain injury.” 
Alongside this she delivers training for new staff, facilitates workshops for 
volunteers and is the organisation’s safeguarding lead.

“I provide one-to-one therapy supporting people to achieve goals that hold 
meaning for them,” she explains. “This might be to cook a meal for their 
family, to gain a voluntary job that is stimulating and meaningful, to return 
to college and successfully pass their course, or to remember what they have 
done each day.”

The route into OT is usually via a bachelor degree in occupational therapy or 
a postgrad course approved by theHealth and Care Professions Council (HCPC) 
<http://www.hcpc-uk.co.uk/>. It’s also possible to start as OT support staff 
with training on the job.

Lockyer graduated in occupational therapy before working for an acute mental 
health service for a year, then on a hospital medical ward, and in a spine 
injuries unit in New Zealand. “This was a pivotal experience very early on in 
my career,” she says, “and I have worked with people with neurological 
conditions since.”

There is, of course, no typical day but, for example, Lockyer saysher recent 
diary included attending a meeting with a clinical psychologist and case 
manager to update each other and discuss intervention with a young member, 
running an arm therapy group, and writing a schedule with two members who were 
leading a public workshop the following day.

She then visited a new member at home who had just spent a year in hospital to 
talk with him about his goals for ongoing rehabilitation, part of whichincluded 
being able to bake and ice a wedding cake again and to return to Mauritian 
dancing.”

The highs are frequent, says Lockyer. “About 10 years ago I was working with a 
man in his 50s who had experienced a stroke; he was unable to express himself 
verbally and had significant difficulties understanding language. He also had 
problems moving, struggled to recognise everyday objects, and found it 
challenging to sequence everyday tasks.

“He had worked as a financial executive in the city but it was not his work 
that he wanted to get back to. The goal that we worked on together, involving 
approximately three months of weekly therapy, was to cook his wife a meal. The 
first time he achieved this, including laying the table and pouring them both 
glasses of wine, the three of us all cried. It was truly wonderful to help 
someone achieve something which held so much meaning for them.”

Much of London-based paediatric OT Moyna Talcer’s work involves playing. “This 
is how children learn, explore and make sense of the world,” she says. Talcer 
works in a variety of settings, including the child’s home, clinics, schools 
and the community and specialises in sensory integration therapy.

She says: “I can go from a serious business meeting, to a hands-on therapy 
session where I am on a platform swing with a child, to getting really messy 
with shaving foam and glitter to then meeting a client and parent to conduct a 
formal assessment – and finally presenting one of my training workshops.” 
Talcer addsthat she is frequently called upon to write specialist assessment 
and tribunal reports.


Related: Why you should consider a career in occupational therapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jan/28/occupational-therapy-career-jobs>

One of Talcer’s highlights has been helping a little boy ride a bike. “He 
couldn’t walk until he was five and when I first met him at the age of seven he 
was unable to stand still. He couldn’t stabilise his core enough to remain 
upright, so he swayed from one foot to another constantly. He was so weak that 
he couldn’t lift his head up when he was on his front and couldn’t stand up 
from the floor without help.”

Following therapy he was drawing on the walls at home (much to his parents’ 
joy) and riding his bike: “This child taught me the biggest lesson, never give 
up on your goal and never put a cap on what can be possible.”

Victoria O’Cuinneagain is a Macmillan OT, working with people with a 
life-limiting illness at theHospice of St Francis <http://www.stfrancis.org.uk/>
 in Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire. She works with people on a survivorship pathway 
(in remission from a disease such as cancer). “The focus of my work is to 
promote self-management, whereby patients, carers or loved ones are given the 
support to take control and help themselves live well with their diagnosis. In 
essence, I help them to feel comfortable with being a different person than 
they were before their illness.”

After training in OT at Canterbury Christ Church University 
<https://www.canterbury.ac.uk/study-here/courses/undergraduate/occupational-therapy.aspx>
, O’Cuinneagain worked across the NHS in health and social care roles. 
“Professionally I felt I could make more of a difference to patients who need 
end-of-life care by working at a hospice.”

On a day-to-day basis O’Cuinneagain might have an assessment with an 
inpatient, or she might visit a patient at home and recommend equipment, or run 
a therapeutic group. “Of course there are sad days,” she says, “but these are 
coupled with the satisfaction of knowing that during difficult times we are 
able to support our patients retain some choice and control over their life.”

Looking for a job? Browse Guardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> or sign 
up toGuardian Careers <https://register.theguardian.com/careers/> for the 
latest job vacancies and career advice
