
All of us want to stay in our own homes as long as we can as we get older. 
It’s good for us – and it saves on the cost of residential care.

But how can we create homes that enable people to live independently while 
remaining safe and supported? Here are five tips for creating better supported 
housing:

Build individual homes with communal facilities 

The best of both worlds is creating a community in which older people can 
thrive. They can walk through their own front door and make their own decisions 
but they and their families have the comfort of knowing they are safe.

Provide onsite care 

Many older people do not have high care needs, but having onsite care provides 
a safety net, especially for those who need a bit more support.


We’ve started to move away from dementia wings in our extra care schemes 
because our research showed those with the condition fare better when they live 
in a community with others who don’t have it. The stimulation of being part of 
a more diverse community and the support networks that emerge are far better 
for their wellbeing.

Get clued up on dementia 

One million people will have dementia <http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/statistics>
 by 2025. Housing providers need to cater for this – and this means going well 
beyond token gestures like building dementia-friendly gardens.


Gather data and develop a better understanding of the needs of people living 
with dementia. Think about the design, the build and the recruitment and 
training of care staff. Commission your own research and constantly gather 
evidence to inform the approach you take.

Train as many of your staff as possible to help them deal with people living 
with dementia and take advantage of some of the great schemes that are already 
out there, like theAlzheimer’s Society’s dementia friends initiative 
<https://www.dementiafriends.org.uk>.


Don’t go it alone

Creating homes for older people brings the need for partnership work into 
sharp focus. That means working with commissioners, local authorities and 
funding bodies, but also, of course, involving community ventures, charities, 
health bodies and residents’ carers and families.

Like many new schemes for older people, ours include communal facilities like 
restaurants and shops. Too often, these facilities tend to be planned around 
some vague idea of what you think residents will need. But you need to work 
with everyone to establish where there is genuine need. Take advantage of 
existing community ventures and other local voluntary groups and ask them to 
help run shops, groups and events at your schemes– they are often very keen to 
be involved.

Innovate, but don’t get carried away 

Providing affordable housing for older people that goes beyond residential 
care is still relatively new, so in many ways everything we are doing is 
already innovative. Having a single, blueprint approach is doomed to fail. And 
while it is good practice to look at pioneering new technologies if these can 
make a difference, , there is no point innovating for innovation’s sake.

Don’t be short-sighted and focus on technological developments or fads or 
you’ll start to hit all kinds of snags at the expense of getting the basics, 
like the build and tenure mix, wrong.

Sign up  <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/>for your free 
Guardian Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you 
every Friday. Follow us:@GuardianHousing <https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>

Looking for a job in housing? See all the latest vacancies  
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/housing/>on our Guardian Jobs site
