
The practice of medicine can be hit-and-miss: however good a drug is, it is 
unlikely to work well on everybody with that condition, whether it’s breast 
cancer or depression. But new treatments are emerging that are more able to 
respond to the particular characteristics a disease takes in an individual and 
that may, in the next 10 to 20 years, transform the way people are treated.

While we can’t say for certain what drugs will be on the market in the next 
decade or so, basic research can provide some clues. In the treatment of 
cancer, basic research is focused on targeted therapies – treatments directed 
at the characteristics of a particular tumour, such as gene mutations or 
particular proteins. Tommy Dolan, director of Pfizer’s research and development 
site at Sandwich, says: “What we’re now seeing is things like ovarian cancer 
getting segmented into many different types of disease, and what that’s allowed 
us to do is target specific treatments with specific sub-segments of the cancer 
population.”


A lot of work is being carried out in the area of immunotherapeutic, or 
biologic, drugs. Traditional chemotherapy works by killing cancer cells, but 
also damages healthy cells. Immunotherapies, derived from the cells of living 
organisms, help the body fight off the cancer itself. Ginny Acha, executive 
director for research, medical and innovation at the Association of the British 
Pharmaceutical Industry, says: “You’re getting your body to recognise that that 
disease is a problem and let its own immune system deal with it.”


Related: NHS green light for new ovarian cancer drug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/27/nhs-green-light-for-new-ovarian-cancer-drug>

Susan Galbraith, senior vice-president and head of the oncology innovative 
medicines group at AstraZeneca, says that immunotherapies are already starting 
to replace chemotherapy as the principal treatment in melanoma, and says that 
data shows they may have the potential to be used in lung cancer.


Galbraith is working on DNA damage response agents, which target enzymes that 
repair damaged DNA. AstraZeneca’s drug Olaparib inhibits a protein involved in 
DNA repair. “In cancer cells that have already got a loss of one of the repair 
mechanisms, if you then inhibit a second repair mechanism, it means that the 
cell gets so much damage that it can’t survive,” she says. “The other beauty of 
this is that the remaining cells in the body have got the normal repair 
mechanism still intact.”


Olaparib acts against cancers in people who have the hereditary BRCA1 or BRCA2 
gene mutations. While these are relatively rare, Galbraith says that about 40% 
of patients with common cancers have a deficiency in a gene involved in DNA 
repair, and so a drug such as Olaparib potentially has a much wider application.


Biologic drugs are also breaking new ground in the treatment of diseases where 
options have historically been limited. In autoimmune diseases such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, they can inhibit the components of the immune system that 
drive inflammation, a key feature of the disease.


Treatment for asthma has advanced very little in the past half century – but 
biologic drugs hold out hope here too. GSK’s new asthma drug, Nucala, is a 
monoclonal antibody (which means that the drug uses copies of a single 
antibody) that reduces lung inflammation in patients who have a high number of 
eosinophils, a type of white blood cell.


Paul-Peter Tak, senior vice president and head of immuno-inflammation R&D 
(research and development) at GSK, explains: “It’s a form of personalised 
medicine, which makes it much more attractive, because you can identify subsets 
of patients who are more likely to respond to Nucala based on their eosinophils 
count in their peripheral blood.” This type of treatment will become more 
common, says Tak: “We are more and more focused on trying to change the course 
of the disease rather than merely treating signs and symptoms.”


Related: Cancer tumour genetics reveal possible treatment revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/03/genetics-of-cancer-tumours-reveal-possible-treatment-revolution>

The treatment of Alzheimer’s may also be on the verge of a breakthrough, as a 
result of developments in immunotherapeutic drugs. Alzheimer’s is characterised 
by the formation of amyloid plaques on the brain. John Hardy, professor of 
neuroscience at University College London, says that anti-amyloid drugs, which 
use antibodies to attack amyloids, are currently in phase 3 trials. Early stage 
trials are also underway of non-biologic drugs that prevent amyloid formation. 
“If any of those work, the field will feel that we have really turned the 
corner,” he says.


A greater understanding of genetics and the mapping of the human genome are 
driving the development of drugs that can treat rare genetic diseases. “There 
are about 7,000 rare diseases, and about 80% of those have a genetic component. 
A significant number are monogenic, in other words there’s one gene displaced 
that causes you to have the condition,” says Dolan. If we can correct the 
displacement of that single gene, he adds, then there is potential for a cure.


Epigenetics – the science of why some genes are switched “on” or “off” – 
provides another avenue for exploration, says Tak. Drug companies are now 
looking at how to modify the epigenetic process in some diseases, particularly 
auto-immune diseases.


In the next decade or so, we can expect to see more medicines that are 
precisely targeted and take into account genetic makeup, lifestyle and 
epigenetic influences – as well as the nature of individual diseases. As Dolan 
says: “There’s a much greater understanding of the molecular mechanisms and 
pathways of disease and we’re still uncovering many secrets.”


Join the Healthcare Professionals Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/healthcare-professionals/?CMP=dis-166> to 
read more pieces like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHealthcare>) to keep up with the latest healthcare news 
and views.
