
Evening, Friday Dinner table, with extended family. You breathe out with the 
breath of a thousand potatoes, and prepare yourself for the traditional 
digestif: an elderly relative explaining why theLabour party is antisemitic 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/02/labour-suspends-two-councillors-alleged-antisemitism>
. This is an argument that can be imposed on to any topic – Germany, the 
countryside, boating. But today it is the Labour party, and as usual you are 
arguing on the side of “no”, with your pleas to interrogate the source of the 
story, and to look at individuals rather than write off the whole of the party, 
or of Suffolk, or of the seas. But this is an unwinnable fight, because on 
their side they have memories of siblings being shuffled on to trains, and 
their homes being bombed, and with that comes the sureness that it is only a 
matter of time. So you settle into your ice cream and talk about Beyoncé 
instead.

As they were crossing the road, the men at the tables started chanting: ‘We 
hate Jews.’ You say: I’m calling the police

Midday, Saturday Driving through London on a warm afternoon, you’re unaware of 
an anti-war demonstration happening near Hyde Park. “Beep your horn!” people 
shout, and you do. You hate war. Beep! You’re crawling through the crowds, but 
it’s fine, you hate war, and you’ve texted your friend to say you’ll be late. 
Then someone smacks your bonnet: “Beep!” You’ve just beeped, but fine, beep. 
This group of people, though, their signs say “Boycott Israel”, so you try to 
avoid eye contact until you’re alongside the less specific banners, even though 
they keep shouting through the window. If they look in your eyes, they might 
know. You’re going to Israel for a family wedding soon. You’ve bought a strappy 
dress. But you haven’t told many people you’re going, and you’re not sure 
exactly why. You understand Israel as a home, and a holiday destination, and as 
a symbol. But you can keep those empathies in your head at the same time as 
this feeling of deep dread at the very bad things, and you can stare ahead 
through the windscreen with a sense of shallow apology, and you can pretend you 
haven’t heard the shouting.

Afternoon, July Your parents are leaving your flat, having come to visit your 
week-old child, her eyes just opening, her 6lb body more story than flesh. They 
call you from the car. Bit odd. Do you know the man who runs the café 
downstairs? As they were crossing the road, the men at the tables started 
chanting: “We hate Jews.” You say: I’m calling the police. Please don’t, say 
your parents. Let’s not make a fuss. Your mum was irritated with herself. She 
wished that, instead of getting into the car she had told them about her new 
grandchild, and looked them in the eye and asked about their families, too.

Morning, Passover A non-Jewish friend on the way to your family’s seder 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Passover_Seder> remarks to a colleague that she 
didn’t realise Peckham’s Morrisons didn’t have a kosher section. He replies: 
“Of course not, they all live in north London.” And later she tells you this, 
her eyebrows knotted, because she’s realised how many times she hears this 
“they”, this strange otherness discussed in throwaway euphemisms. Jokes about 
bagels. A friend’s recurring screech: “I’m Jewish!” upon receipt of the bill at 
dinner, despite it being a distant bloodline, and despite them being blonde. 
And while you quietly maintain a fraction of your elderly relatives’ paranoia, 
you realise you live within clingfilm, protected enough that you don’t have to 
debate your right to exist, or to hide. Occasionally the seal breaks.

The internet, May You are wearily learning about how you are supposed to feel 
about antisemitism from a series of clever men whose foreskins, it’s clear, 
have no bearing on their authority speaking on a subject which 0.5% of the UK 
navigate daily. You are seeing your experience used as a political grenade. And 
the worst thing about it, you think as you walk through the glittering of 
Britain in blossom season, is that your opinions (even yours, the opinions of a 
pork-eating God-sceptic, of a person only Jew-ish) are already assumed. When 
yours are firmly wobbly. It’s not possible for you to support Israel 
uncritically, as your elderly relatives might. But it’s uncomfortable to hear a 
non-Jew criticise it, in part because that criticism feels stained – with Yid 
chants, with the trick-or-treater’s joke about Goldilocks and the big nose, 
with the swastika sprayed on your fence at night. You don’t want to be forced 
to have an opinion. Because there is no room for nuance when you’re pressed 
against the wall.

Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk <mailto:e.wiseman@observer.co.uk> or 
follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman 
<https://twitter.com/EvaWiseman?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
