
A dish whose principal ingredients are eggs and bacon was always going to be a 
shoo-in for the British palate: certainly spaghetti carbonara was a regular in 
my dad's repertoire when pesto was only a glint in a supermarket buyer's eye. 
As with so many Italian foodstuffs, it has adisputed history 
<http://www.departures.com/articles/carbonara-secrets-of-a-perfect-dish>, 
although most people accept that carbonara probably originated in, or near Rome.

It's apparently named after the carbonai, or charcoal burners, allegedly 
because it was a favourite of these grimy men who spent months deep in the 
Apennines, relying on foodstuffs that could be easily transported, stored and 
then prepared over a fire. Sophia Loren claims to have happened upon a group of 
these lucky fellows while filming Two Women in the mountains in the late 
fifties – who obligingly cooked her a slap-up carbonara lunch.

Loth as I'd be to contradict the legendary Loren, there are people who believe 
that the whole carbonaio thing is simply a romantic legend, suggesting instead 
that the dish was created by local cooks for American GIs who took their 
rations of bacon and eggs to them to prepare over streetside charcoal braziers. 
More mature Romans dispute this however, claiming they remember enjoying 
carbonara while said GIs were still eating milk and cookies at their mother's 
knees.

Most plausibly of all, in my opinion, is the theory that the name simply 
refers to the copious amounts of black pepper customarily added to the dish: so 
much, in fact, that it's almost as if it's been seasoned with charcoal. It's 
one of those things which people will no doubt still be squabbling over as the 
earth implodes: far more important, in my opinion, is working out how to make a 
really good one. Which is where I come in.

Pasta
 Prawn Cocktail Years recipe carbonara - but with spaghetti. Photograph: 
Felicity Cloake 
It's spaghetti cabonara, right? Well, not if you're Elizabeth David or Simon 
Hopkinson: the former bills it as maccheroni alla carbonara (I demand to know 
why we no longer spell it like this: it's magnificent), although concedes it 
can be made "with any shaped macaroni, spaghetti or noodles", and the latter 
claims that, at the River Cafe, from where the recipe in the Prawn Cocktail 
Years has been borrowed, they use penne, "and to great effect". Having never 
been fortunate enough to eat at that much esteemed west London establishment, 
I'll have to take his word for it, but in the River Cafe Classic Italian 
Cookbook they certainly use spaghetti, "inspired by the version we ate in the 
restaurant Carbonni, in the Piazza Campo dei Fiori in Rome".

Although forced by an unexpected shortage of penne to swap the two around 
during testing (so I make the River Cafe recipe with penne, and the Prawn 
Cocktail Years one with spaghetti; keep up at the back), there's no confusion 
in my mind as to which is the superior choice. Penne is not only too dense for 
my taste, especially with the rich sauce, but also spoils one of the chief 
pleasures of this dish: slurping up the egg-slick spaghetti. Macaroni, as the 
style guide compels me to spell it, is rather better, as it's smaller than 
penne, but again, no slurping required. Spaghetti it is.

Sauce
 River Cafe Classic Italian Cookbook recipe carbonara (with Simon Hopkinson's 
penne). Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Although pasta makes up at least three-quarters of a carbonara however, it's 
almost an irrelevance as far as I'm concerned: the real test is the sauce. 
These fall, broadly, into three camps: those which use eggs and cream, those 
which use eggs and butter, and those which keep it simple and just use eggs. 
Cream and butter, obviously, would not have been ideal luggage for charcoal 
burners setting off for a few weeks in the mountains, somany purists 
<http://chowhound.chow.com/topics/408901> insist they're later additions to the 
pasta party, possibly because they offer an easier way to recreate the 
creaminess of barely set eggs for restaurants turning out plate after plate of 
the stuff, or home cooks chary of salmonella and its unpleasant ilk. If they 
make the dish better, however, I'm happy to keep them: this is the perfect 
carbonara, not the oldest.

Simon Hopkinson and Nigella Lawson both use double cream, Ursula Ferrigno's 
Complete Italian Cookery Course goes for crème fraîche, slightly oddly, and the 
River Cafe and Anna del Conte choose butter. Elizabeth David and theSilver Spoon
 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/the-silver-spoon/recipes/2010/april/22/spaghetti-carbonara/>
 stick with just eggs. Much as I love cream, as soon as I tasted a carbonara 
without it, I realised it was totally unnecessary: not only does it add an 
overbearing richness (as if eggs, cheese and fatty pork weren't enough), but 
dilutes the delicate flavour of the egg itself and leaves a pool of sauce at 
the bottom of the bowl when really all that's needed is something to coat the 
pasta. (Tangy crème fraîche, meanwhile, is frankly just bizarre, reminding me 
of my college speciality: value penne with crème fraîche, smoked salmon 
trimmings and vast amounts of generic Italian hard cheese.)

Butter is better, melting into the sauce. Anna Del Conte 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/recipes/5879148/Anna-Del-Conte-recipe-Bucatini-or-spaghetti-alla-carbonara.html>
 suggests beating a tablespoon into egg and cheese, which is difficult; it's 
much better to do as the River Cafe recipe suggests and allow it to melt in the 
pan before adding the other two ingredients. But having tasted the Elizabeth 
David recipe, I can assure you that the eggs and rendered pork fat should add 
all the body you need.

Eggs is eggs
 Nigella Lawson recipe spaghetti carbonara. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Of course, as ever, it's not that simple. Should I use whole eggs, as in the 
Nigella Lawson, Silver Spoon, Elizabeth David and Ursula Ferrigno recipes, egg 
yolks, as the River Cafe and Prawn Cocktail Years suggest, or a mixture of the 
two, like Anna del Conte? Yolks alone I think too cloying – when mixed with the 
grated cheese, they become a stubborn paste, difficult to loosen and toss 
through the pasta, which means adding more cooking water, pointlessly, given 
you've just thrown away the egg whites. Whole eggs work well, but I'm going to 
add just the one extra yolk, just because this really isn't a dish you'd eat 
every day, and it does add a glorious eggy richness to it.

Bacon and rasher suggestions
 Elizabeth David recipe carbonara. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Or not – because it turns out the Italians don't use good old streaky for 
carbonara, they preferpancetta 
<http://www.americastestkitchenfeed.com/do-it-yourself/2012/02/how-to-make-pancetta/>
, which is dry cured, generally unsmoked, and usually comes in slabs rather 
than mimsy little slices. Unsmoked bacon is often suggested as a substitute by 
cookery writers like Anna del Conte, on the basis that pancetta isn't widely 
available in this country and if you can get hold of a slab of good, dry-cured 
streaky bacon, and cut it into stout cubes yourself, it will work far better 
than the wafer thin pancetta often found in supermarkets. (Do make sure it's 
unsmoked though; Ursula Ferrigno advocates smoked streaky, but I think you need 
the meat to have a slight sweetness: smoke and cheese is umami overload.)

A good pancetta that you can cut into thick chunks yourself, is even better of 
course: the pieces must be thick enough not to dry out in the pan, and fatty 
enough to contribute to the sauce. The River Cafe admonishes you to cook it 
until soft and translucent, but not brown, but, although it shouldn't be 
leathery, I preferNigella's instructions 
<http://www.nigella.com/recipes/view/spaghetti-alla-carbonara-127> to fry it 
"until crispy but not crunchy". Some of the fat should remain tender, but a 
little bit of bite is a pleasant textural contrast to the silky pasta.

Elizabeth David dodges the question entirely by translating maccheroni alla 
carbonara as "macaroni with ham and eggs", and using "ham, or coppa (Italian 
cured pork shoulder)" cut into matchstick lengths instead. Tempted as I am to 
use the baked British ham that would presumably have been the only option for 
most of her readers when Italian Food was first published in 1954, I suspect 
she herself would have made a special journey to Soho for "very good, but 
expensive" coppa, so I invest in some (it's still pretty pricey today) to make 
her recipe. Perhaps it's the cut, but I find it too dry: the slight yielding 
squidginess of pancetta is far better.

Say cheese
 Anna del Conte recipe spaghetti carbonara. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
This isn't a pasta dish which allows for a delicate sprinkle of parmesan just 
before serving: no, carbonara demands almost unbelievable amounts of cheese, 
which, as it melts, helps to give the sauce its distinctively creamy texture. 
Given the dish's Roman roots, it's unsurprising that many recipes, the River 
Cafe, Anna del Conte and the Silver Spoon among them, call for a mixture of 
parmesan andpecorino romano 
<http://forums.egullet.org/index.php?/topic/134412-parmigiano-reggiano-pecorino-romano-when-to-use-which-or-both/>
, a hard, salty ewe's milk cheese popular in central Italy. To my mind it has a 
lighter, more lactic flavour than parmesan, which, in bulk, can make the dish 
overpoweringly cheesy: the combination means that everything works in harmony.

Alliums
 Ursula Ferrigno recipe spaghetti carbonara. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
A pasta dish without garlic? But, it seems, most carbonaras don't include it: 
only Anna del Conte and the Silver Spoon use it, and only to flavour the 
cooking oil: the garlic itself is discarded once cooked. The River Cafe include 
red onion in their recipe, and Ursula Ferrigno a yellow one, but everyone else 
eschews alliums altogether. Although I like the sweetness of the onions with 
the saltiness of the cheese and pancetta, I think the flavour is too dominant: 
the subtle garlic taste of del Conte's dish is far more pleasing, adding a very 
faint heat, without shouting about it.

The River Cafe also include chopped flat-leaf parsley in their dish, which 
looks pretty, but doesn't add much: there should be enough black pepper to 
render it unnecessary. Nigella, like the US legendMarcella Hazan 
<http://the.honoluluadvertiser.com/article/2002/Nov/06/il/il12ataste.html> 
sneaks in a splash of white wine, simmering it down, with the pancetta, into a 
"salty, winey syrup". Although undoubtedly delicious (who doesn't like wine, 
bacon and cream?), it reminds me more of something French than a classic 
carbonara. I do like her final grating of nutmeg though – entirely optional, 
and definitely not very Roman, but as usual, it works wonderfully with egg.

Method

Carbonara may be a simple dish, but the devil is in the detail, namely, how to 
add eggs to a hot pan and not end up with egg-fried pasta, as in Elizabeth 
David's recipe, which directs you to cook them "until they present a slightly 
granulated appearance without being as thick as scrambled eggs". The most 
helpful guide to this is on awonderful blog <http://racheleats.wordpress.com> 
written by an adopted Roman called Rachel, who has overcome severe carbonara 
anxiety over "the crucial moment, the moment you pull the pan from the flame 
and add the egg and cheese to the pasta and guanciale ... endless discussions 
about the stir, the fold, the flick of the wrist needed to combine the eggs and 
cheese with the pasta, the moment you add the slug of the pasta cooking water – 
the pasta water you have judiciously set aside – to the pan, the slug that will 
loosen the straw coloured sauce into a soft creamy coat", to perfecther very 
own version <http://racheleats.wordpress.com/2010/12/04/six-years/>. In short 
you toss the pasta with the pancetta and its rendered fat until every strand is 
well coated, then take off the heat, add the egg and cheese, "tossing to 
combine", loosen it all with a little cooking water, and serve immediately. 
It's an art, but one well worth perfecting.

Perfect spaghetti carbonara
 Felicity's perfect spaghetti carbonara. Photograph: Felicity Cloake 
Serves 2

1 tbsp olive oil
1 garlic clove, sliced
75g pancetta, cubed
250g dried spaghetti
2 eggs and 1 egg yolk
25g pecorino romano, finely grated
25g parmesan, finely grated
Freshly ground black pepper
Nutmeg, optional

1. Put two bowls into a low oven to keep warm, or boil a kettle and half fill 
them with hot water. Heat the oil in a large frying pan on a medium heat, then 
add the garlic and cook until well coloured, then remove from the pan with a 
slotted spoon and discard. Add the pancetta and cook until translucent and 
golden, but not brown around the edges.

2. Meanwhile, cook the spaghetti in plenty of boiling, salted water until al 
dente. In a bowl, beat together the eggs and the extra yolk and then stir in 
the the pecorino and most of the parmesan, reserving a little for garnish. 
Grind in plenty of black pepper.

3. Scoop out a small cupful of the pasta cooking water, and then drain the 
pasta well. Tip it into the frying pan and toss to coat with the pancetta fat.

4. Take the pan off the heat and tip in the egg mixture, tossing the pasta 
furiously, then, once it's begun to thicken, add a dash of cooking water to 
loosen the sauce. Toss again, and divide between the warm bowls, finishing off 
with a grating of nutmeg and a little more parmesan. Eat immediately.

Garlic or onion, pecorino or parmesan, bacon or ham, cream or butter – how do 
you like your carbonara, and what's the secret to getting that perfect 
consistency? Do you, blasphemously, add peas, as they tend to in the States, or 
mushrooms, like my dad? And can anyone tell me why you never see carbonara's 
close relative, fettucine alfredo, in the UK when it's so madly popular in 
America?
