
I am sitting in the hairdressers, struggling to keep baby Flora on my knee 
while Going to the Chapel is playing loudly in the background. "We're playing 
it for you to get in the mood," says my hairdresser, who is piling my hair high 
on my head.

"My hair's a bit high," I say anxiously.

"You're the bride," she says firmly. "You're meant to have big hair."

My mobile phone rings. It's my 22-year-old son, Sam, who has to shout to be 
heard over the hairdryer. "Mum, Mum," he says. "I couldn't get hold of P last 
night. I haven't been able to borrow his suit. I've got nothing to wear."

There are two hours to go before the wedding. So I don't bother to negotiate 
my hair down but dash to pick up Sam and drive him to the nearest Moss Bros. "I 
knew this would happen," I tell him in the car. "What goes around comes around. 
One day you'll have a big event and someone you love will behave selfishly."

"That's a mean thing to say," says Sam.

"Well, you've done a mean thing. It's my wedding day and I've got to get 
ready, and I've been asking you for weeks to come with me to buy a suit," I 
say, although my heart's not really in a fight today.

And we really didn't need to buy it weeks ago because in 10 minutes we leave 
the shop, arms linked, row forgotten, both smiling, with the perfect suit.

Meanwhile, Maddy, my 19-year-old, has managed to get the younger girls ready. 
They line up, unselfconscious and excited, hugging their bridesmaid's bouquets. 
We're already 10 minutes late as Maddy helps me wriggle into my wedding dress 
(gold, £100 from Debenhams) and together we jog up the road to the church. 
Tilly, who's 12, tries to stop my dress trailing on the pavement. Out of 
vanity, I hold the bouquet over my stomach. And just before we enter the 
church, I get it. If you're the bride, you not only have to have big hair but 
also you have to smile. And as soon as I start smiling, I can't stop.

It's a perfect service. J tells me quite convincingly I look lovely; my 
brother, who's giving me away, looks moved; our priest is relaxed and 
reassuring; the organ is rousing; the choir (rustled up at short notice) is 
sublime; my son looks handsome; the girls stand beside me smiling shyly; and 
J's mother and mine look misty eyed. Flora squawks when the question "Does 
anyone object to this union?" is asked, and I have to whisper to J to push 
harder as he puts the ring on my finger ("It's a fat finger with a small 
knuckle – they're always a problem," said the lady in the shop).

An hour in, I'm still smiling and loving our wedding and everyone who's come 
to it. I wonder why anyone would get married before they have children and are 
middle aged – our reception is a perfect mixture of wedding (food, alcohol and 
swing band) and children's party (magician and chocolate fountain). But unlike 
a children's party I don't count the minutes before it's over. My brother makes 
a lovely speech that mentions our father (who died a few years ago) and I make 
one in which I forget to thank half the people I wanted to, but do tell J I 
love him. Somehow our wedding retains the tradition of a first dance, which J 
and I haven't practised.

"Very Ann Widdecombe," says a friend of J's mother.

Before we know it, it's over.

We pile home in the people-carrier and start our married life, which is pretty 
much like our unmarried life, except I'm still smiling. Within a few minutes of 
getting into bed, we have Flora spread out, snoring, lying firmly between us.
