
Kariwak Village hotel
Cooked with veg and herbs grown organically on site, Kariwak’s food is 
reliably excellent. Breakfasts of smoked herring and coconut bake, 
cornmeal-fried flying fish or traditional cocoa tea are worth trying even if 
you’re not a hotel guest, while the three-course set dinner has a delicious 
meat, fish and veggie option – such as smoky rosemary shrimp or curry-baked 
chicken with sherry.kariwak.com <http://kariwak.com/>

The Seahorse Inn
With fairylit tables laid out on a terrace above Stonehaven Bay, this is a 
highly romantic dinner setting. The well-reputed food fuses local cuisine with 
international flair: start with jerk chicken satay or Creole crab cakes, move 
on to a superbly cooked steak or blackened swordfish, and pair your meal with 
something from the well-chosen wine list.seahorseinntobago.com 
<http://seahorseinntobago.com/>

Related: Unmissable excursions in Tobago - in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-tobago/gallery/2016/may/26/unmissable-excursions-in-tobago-in-pictures>

La Tartaruga
Just across from the beach at Buccoo, this Italian-owned restaurant serves 
authentic pizza and homemade pasta, such as simple penne puttanesca and 
spaghetti with meatballs; other highlights include grilled lobster and beef 
cannelloni in mushroom cream sauce. Desserts are sublime – try the lime 
cheesecake or the tiramisu – and the huge selection of mainly Italian wine is 
the best in Tobago.latartarugatobago.com <http://www.latartarugatobago.com/>

Jackie’s Roti
There’s just one thing on offer at this battered green shack across from Mount 
Irvine beach: the T&T speciality of roti, a sort of curried burrito. Made fresh 
each day, Jackie’s light, stretchy “skins” (aka bread) are laced with spicy 
ground split peas and wrapped around curried chicken or seasoned flying fish, 
pepped up with channa (stewed chickpea and potato) and curried pumpkin, and 
finished with curried mango or pommecythere, the latter a tangy local fruit. 
Perfect for a picnic on the sand.

Salsa Kitchen
Just outside Scarborough, this tiny restaurant on a fairylit, plant-covered 
patio serves unusual and unfailingly delicious Caribbean-style tapas, with 
small plates such as curried lobster, smoky minted pork, lamb with tamarind and 
local-style tomato choka, and fish with lime and chadon beni (posh cousin of 
coriander). Space is limited, so book ahead, and be sure to dip into the wide 
selection of regional rums.

Fish Pot
Long a hangout of Mount Irvine’s surf crowd, Pleasant Prospect is a buzzy 
little spot, with this informal fish place on a wooden deck at the centre of 
the action. The small blackboard menu details what the fishermen have brought 
in that day – kingfish, wahoo, mahi-mahi, or river crayfish – cooked simply and 
served with rice or potatoes and veg; there’s also imported steaks, salads and 
starters.

Glasgow’s Bar
No drive along Tobago’s Caribbean coast would be complete without a stop at 
this friendly bar. It offers gorgeous views over Parlatuvier Bay, with its 
horseshoe of sand spiked by a long fishing pier, overlooked by terraced 
hillsides dotted with ice-cream coloured houses and neatly tended gardens. 
Beers are “beastly” cold, as they say here, and there’s fish or chicken and 
chips on offer, too.

Castara Retreats restaurant
This eco-resort eaterie is a reliable choice in a village where opening hours 
are often fluid. Enjoy a classic cocktail then move on to jerk chicken, 
chargrilled prawns or fresh fish with a tamarind dipping sauce. The silky 
chocolate mousse, made with Tobago Cocoa Estate bars, is worth the drive alone 
from Crown Point.castararetreats.com <https://www.castararetreats.com/>

Suckhole
At Tobago’s northeast tip, Charlotteville tumbles down a hillside to the long 
sweep of Man O’War Bay, where fishermen dry nets and mend pirogues on the sand. 
Just the west of the village proper lies the swimming beach, where this 
startlingly named bar doles out cold beers, rum drinks and plenty of “ol’ talk” 
– banter, Tobago style. The chips-with-everything menu is decent, but for fresh 
fish meals you’re better off with a takeaway from G’s roadside shack on the 
main street.

Shore Things
A little off the beaten path on Milton Road in Lambeau, this cool and casual 
little cafe serves food until dusk. There’s a daily local special – chicken 
pelau and coleslaw, or steamed fish – alongside quiche, chilli, crepes, pizzas 
and salads, while sweet treats include cream-cheese brownies, ice cream and 
coconut cream pie.

How to get there
British Airways flights to Tobago leave from London Gatwick twice a week and 
include a brief stop in Antigua. Once on board, sit back, relax and enjoy their 
complimentary food and drink service alongside the latest in-flight 
entertainment and start your holiday as soon as you step on board. For more 
information, clickhere 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/destinations/trinidad-and-tobago/holidays-in-tobago?ref_site=2016Q2Tobago>
