
Labour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> could lose up to £8m a 
year as a result of the government’s changes to trade union funding, the 
party’s general secretary has revealed.

Iain McNicol, Labour’s most senior official, said the restrictions would 
“immediately and seriously undermine the Labour party’s finances”.

The sum is £2m more than initial estimates 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/10/labour-expecting-6m-loss-in-funding-through-trade-union-bill>
 of what Labour would lose from the reforms brought in by the Conservatives 
under the trade union bill.

It will combine with cuts to public funding of opposition parties – known as 
Short money – to cripple Labour’s traditional methods of financing.

McNicol told a House of Lords committee: “Our own estimate is that a change to 
trade union political funds, as proposed, could reduce the Labour party’s 
income by up to £8m a year. That will have significant consequences.”

The committee is examining party funding after Labour, the Liberal Democrats 
and other peers passed an amendment forcing more scrutiny of the bill’s 
consequences.

Related: Tories undermining Labour funding with 'partisan' trade union bill 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/11/tories-undermining-labours-funding-with-partisan-trade-union-bill>

Some senior Tories, including Michael Forsyth, a peer and former Scotland 
secretary, have said the move is unwise and could ultimately backfire.

“It will take away funding from the Labour party at a time when the Labour 
party is perhaps not at its strongest ... our parliamentary system does depend 
upon having a strong and effective opposition,” he told the Lords last month.

McNicol said the proposal was “unfair and ill thought through” and went 
against a long-established principle that funding issues should be addressed on 
a cross-party basis.

“The bill is, in effect, party funding legislation but is only partial reform 
in that it impacts solely upon the Labour party while not addressing issues 
such as donation caps or spending limits,” he said. “It is, in effect, a 
partisan attempt to smuggle reform in through the back door.”

The bill changes the way trade unionists pay into their union political fund, 
the only source from which unions can give money to Labour. Each union member 
will have to agree in writing every five years to opt into paying the political 
levy, as opposed to opting out via the current system. The rules will apply to 
all 4 million existing political levy payers in unions affiliated to Labour, 
and those who are not.

At least 14 unions affiliate to Labour but a huge bulk of the funding comes 
from five unions that in 2014 affiliated 2,032,297 political levy paying 
members who provide the party with £5.55m in annual income.

Related: Scottish Labour makes new attempt to block trade union bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/14/scottish-labour-trade-union-bill-snp>

In addition, unions draw on their political funds to provide one-off 
donations, mainly at election times, amounting to about £12m. The unions 
provide on average about a third of Labour’s funding over the course of a 
parliament.

A government impact assessment concluded that probably the same number of 
union members would continue to affiliate, which McNicol said was “so 
inaccurate as to be palpably absurd”.

“Experience from Northern Ireland, the examples of Britain in 1927, 
conclusions by the committee on standards in public life all suggest there 
would be considerable reduction in the number affiliated. Our own estimate is 
we could see a reduction of up to 90%.”
