
The story that Newham council is looking into sending families in receipt of 
housing benefits to other parts of the country brought a lot of media interest 
to the issue of housing benefit payments. The controversial move to house 
tenants outside their communities is, however, unnecessary. There is much that 
could be done to improve the way the LocalHousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> Allowance (LHA) system works.

The LHA rate is set at the 30th percentile of local rents, so three out of ten 
properties in any area should – by definition – be available. Indeed, critics 
of the Newham plan were quick to point out that there are many properties are 
on the market to let in Newham at cheap rents.

But the real issue is that many of these homes are not readily available to 
LHA dependent applicants. There are seven main reasons why landlords are often 
reluctant to let to tenants who are on LHA:

1. Payment in arrears

When letting to tenants who depend on the allowance, assuming the LHA can even 
be paid direct to the landlord (which is not always the case following changes 
to the system in 2008), the payments are nearly always made in arrears. This 
compares unfavourably with a private letting where the rent is paid a calendar 
monthly in advance, which means a better cash flow for landlords.

2. Deposits

Tenants <http://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/tenants> who are dependent 
on housing benefit often do not have a deposit they can hand over to the 
landlord to protect. And even where local government can help with a deposit, 
private landlords often tell us that council schemes are cumbersome, slow to 
administer and claim against in the event of damages caused by tenants.

3. Red tape

The administration of housing benefit can be slow and involve lots of form 
filling. Payments can start and stop without notice, and councils retain the 
right to try to claw back past payments from landlords if it later emerges that 
their tenant was claiming fraudulently – even if the landlord was unaware of a 
change in the tenant's circumstances.

4. Attitudes

However wrongly, a minority of private sector landlords still believe that 
tenants claiming housing benefit are more likely miss rental payments or to not 
look after properties properly. We are working to change that perception.

5. Insurance traps

Buildings and contents insurance premiums are often higher where a landlord 
lets to people dependent on the Local Housing Allowance. Sometimes insurance is 
refused to landlords altogether. Central government must challenge the 
insurance industry on whether such inflated premiums are justified by claims 
records.

6. Buy-to-let mortgages

Scandalously, some buy-to-let mortgage loan terms and conditions do not allow 
landlords to let to tenants on any kind of benefits or income support. 
Government should challenge the lenders on this.

7. Constant change

Finally, the array of changes to the housing benefit system, rates of payment 
and rules over the last four years has left landlords feeling confused. Rather 
than trying to understand something that keeps changing, many private landlords 
simply opt out instead.

In London and other large cities where there is a large market of tenants who 
are not dependent on the allowance, growing numbers of private landlords are 
simply avoiding housing benefit lets.

Instead of moving people to other boroughs and cities, government – both 
councils and the cabinet – must look again at how the housing benefit system 
works, and can be made to work better.

Reinstating the option for all tenants to have their benefit paid direct to 
landlords would be a good place to start, but tackling the seven reasons I have 
highlighted would also help.

David Lawrenson is head of the private rent consultancy Letting Focus 
<http://www.LettingFocus.com> and author of Successful Property Letting

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. Join the housing 
network 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/housing/start.php?INTCMP=NECNETLRECT3718>
 for more comment, analysis and best practice
