Why has Bruce Jenner, Olympic gold medal decathlete and paterfamilias of the 
Kardashian clan, been in the news lately?  He’s had an affair with Paris Hilton 
 He’s decided to become a woman  He’s launched a range of juices, smoothies and 
sports drinks called Bruce’s Juices  Tax evasion David Beckham turned 40 in 
May. What disorder does he reportedly have?  SAD  ADHD  OCD  Male PMT Lionel 
Ritchie is playing Glastonbury this year. Which of these acts didn’t appear at 
the first festival at Worthy Farm in 1970 – the Pilton Pop, Blues & Folk 
Festival?  The Kinks  T Rex  Stackridge  Al Stewart Which of these statements 
about celebrity author Will Self is untrue?  He collects vintage typewriters  
He is 6ft 5in tall  He was a team captain on TV’s Shooting Stars  He came up 
with the advertising slogan “Bad news for tooth fairies” for Listerine What is 
the name of the high-security gated community in the San Fernando Valley that 
has been home to many celebrities, including Britney Spears, LeAnn Rimes, Miley 
Cyrus, Kim & Kanye and Justin Bieber?  Hidden Hills  Silver Park  Wayward Pines 
 The Orange Grove Which celebrity was described by one of his conquests as 
“mad, bad and dangerous to know”?  Lord Byron  Beau Brummell  Errol Flynn  Jack 
Nicholson What was the name of the American celebrity who became the mistress 
of Bertie, the Prince of Wales (later Edward VII)?  Bella Charming  The 
Unsinkable Molly Brown  Lillie Langtry  Gypsy Rose Lee Agatha Christie’s Murder 
on the Orient Express was inspired by the kidnapping and murder of the son of 
which American celebrity?  Newspaper tycoon Randolph Hearst  Aviator Charles 
Lindbergh  Actor John Gilbert  Sportsman Babe Ruth It is now hosted by Warwick 
Davis, but who was the first ever host of Celebrity Squares?  Terry Wogan  
Cilla Black  Jimmy Tarbuck  Bob Monkhouse In the golden age of cinema, powerful 
gossip columnists Hedda Hopper and Louella Parsons competed viciously for the 
title of Queen of Hollywood. What did Hopper call her Beverly Hills mansion?  
Golden Whispers  The House That Fear Built  The Star Chamber  Gossip Grange  
You got…  Full marks - you're the complete pub team!  Good knowledge skills! 
You'd be an asset for any pub quiz team.  Good knowledge skills! You'd be an 
asset for any pub quiz team.  Not bad! You'd be a useful member of any pub quiz 
team.  Good try - no one's an expert at everything  Good try - no one's an 
expert at everything  Good try - no one's an expert at everything  Good try - 
no one's an expert at everything  Better luck next time!  Better luck next time!
 Challenge your friends Submit answers 