
I'm sure it's not just me who's peachy keen to rip open their veg seed packets 
in an attempt to boot winter gloom firmly out of the greenhouse door. But is 
there anything to be gained by such impatience? Well, yes, in certain cases 
there is.

Some crops take a long time to mature, so starting them off early – as long as 
you can provide the right growing environment – is a definite bonus. Others are 
robust and fuss-free, so sowing now might gain you an extra-early crop when 
fresh pickings are otherwise scarce. Here are my top five veg that revel in 
being quick off the starting blocks:

Onions

I'm not saying that it's easy to grow onions from seed – in fact it's much 
simpler to plant sets (tiny bulbs) in spring or autumn. But, by sowing 
exhibition onion varieties now you put yourself in with a chance of growing 
super-sized bulbs (check outmammothonion.co.uk <http://www.mammothonion.co.uk/> 
for suitable varieties and growing info; you can also sow exhibition leeks now 
in a very similar way). The most important thing to remember is that any check 
in growth caused by cool temperatures is likely to result in failure, because 
this makes the plants bolt (flower) rather than bulb up, so don't try sowing 
outside now – use a heated propagator instead. Plants will need a snug 
greenhouse/conservatory till mid May, at which point they can be planted in a 
weed-free spot outside. Feed bulbs up with a high-nitrogen feed and who knows, 
you could end up nurturing a ten-pounder come the autumn.

Microleaves

If you've just got to have some fresh greens now, these tiny crops are your 
quickest route to satisfaction. In as little as a week, you can be munching on 
pea shoots (which taste just like fresh peas), radish greens, rocket, 
watercress, celery, nasturtiums – in fact, an infinite number of tangy little 
leaves. All you need is a seed tray, a little seed compost or damp kitchen 
roll, a windowsill, and a lid (clear plastic takeaway trays will do just fine). 
Scatter the seeds quite thickly, pop on the lid, place in a bright, warm spot, 
water if too dry, and then just chop off and eat. This is a great way to use up 
surplus or old seed, but if you want a no-fuss bespoke kit then Suttons has 
just launched anew range 
<http://www.suttons.co.uk/Gardening/Vegetable+Seeds/Featured+Vegetable+Seed+Ranges/Microgreens/list.htm>
.

Broad beans

If you've tried buying podded broad beans in the shops (frozen broad beans are 
a little better), you'll know they're not a patch on home-grown ones. This is 
one crop that actually revels in a cooler soil: they'll emerge when the ground 
is just 2-3C, but try sowing them in too much summer heat and they'll fail. If 
you've got a free-draining soil in a sheltered site, risk sowing them outside 
now. If not (beans hate waterlogging) sow the large seeds 2cm deep, one per 5cm 
module or pot, and pop in a cold greenhouse or under a cloche or cold frame to 
harden off later. You can make a second, direct sowing in late February or 
March, to give a succession of fresh beans over spring and early summer.'De 
Monica' 
<http://www.thompson-morgan.com/vegetables/vegetable-seeds/pea-and-bean-seeds/broad-bean-de-monica/gww4942TM>
 (Thompson & Morgan) is said to give the quickest harvests from a spring 
sowing. Don't forget that you can eat the shoot tips as a spinach alternative 
(pinching these out as soon as blackfly appears is said to deter this pest). 
Mange-tout broad beans, such as'Stereo' 
<http://www.marshalls-seeds.co.uk/broad-bean-stereo-seeds-pid1920.html> 
(Marshalls) are also worth a punt.

Chillies
 Like your chillies super-hot? Now's the time to sow. Photograph: Rawdon Wyatt 
/Alamy 
Phenomenally popular, highly productive, easy to grow from seed and with 
astonishing good looks, you'd be mad not to grow the odd chilli pepper every 
year (a collection of half a dozen plants in pots is even better). Mild types 
like 'Hungarian Hot Wax', and vigorous growers such as F1 hybrids ('Apache' is 
my favourite) can be sown in mid-March. However, if you prefer scorching 
habaneros, nagas and such like, then you should sow them in a heated propagator 
(set at about 24C) pronto. They can take up to a month to germinate, and are 
very slow to mature (especially in dull summers), so need all the help they can 
get. There is a flip side to this – the hotter species are generally easier to 
overwinter than milder ones, and such plants have a head start on the same 
varieties raised from seed. The fab folk at Sea Spring Seeds have put together 
somehandy notes 
<http://www.seaspringseeds.co.uk/growing-information/chilliespeppers/overwintering-chilli-plants>
 on the topic.

Baby carrots

Pulling finger-sized carrots from a container under glass before those in open 
ground are even through the soil is utter indulgence. Use forcing types like 
'Early Nantes' or 'Amsterdam Forcing', sowing them into deep containers now. We 
use 30cm deep plastic crates lined with polythene (the plastic pots rose plants 
are sold in are also ideal). Fill the base with multipurpose or growing bag 
compost, and the upper 5cm with seed compost. Water well, allow to drain and 
then sow your carrot seed thinly on top. Cover with vermiculite and keep at 
10-12C (a gently heated greenhouse or well-lit conservatory is ideal). You'll 
be pulling roots in May. And as a bonus, they'll be rootfly-free – surely 
reason it itself to give this a go?

Also worth a try

F1 hybrid Spring cabbages
Glasshouse tomatoes (if you can provide sufficient heat)
Glasshouse cucumbers (ditto)
Glasshouse melons (ditto)
Sprouting seeds
Baby turnips
Summer radishes
Celery and celeriac
Mustard
Komatsuna
Rocket

Not worth sowing till much later

Pumpkins and courgettes
Sweetcorn
Runner beans

• Lucy Halsall is the editor of Grow Your Own magazine 
<http://www.growfruitandveg.co.uk/magazine/>, which contains a wealth of 
information about growing your own vegetables. There are even more resources on 
thewebsite <http://www.growfruitandveg.co.uk/>, including the new growing 
guides section <http://www.growfruitandveg.co.uk/how-to-grow>.
