
Baby Flora has had a developmental leap. She has gone from being a placid, 
smiley baby to being a tyrant.

"She's so calm," friends would tell me. "It must be because you're so relaxed; 
you're such an experienced mother."

"Well, I'm not sure it's me," I would say. "She's just an easy baby."

But in truth I did hope Flora's sunny temperament was down to me. Although I 
suspected she realised I was too old to cope with a demanding baby.

Well, now the gloves are off.

Flora squawks and lunges for anything anyone else has. She is noisier than the 
TV on maximum volume.

Her teeth, or absence of them, make her yelp, dribble and bite my face. Where 
once she breastfed looking up at me adoringly, now she gnaws and twists my 
nipple, growling angrily.

If she's fed up in the car, she screams until we all sing nursery rhymes or 
frantically wave toys at her.

"Flora," says Lydia, who used to be the youngest, "is ruling this family."

"It'll pass," I say. "You were all like this. It's a stage she's going 
through."

Rightly or wrongly, I work on the principle that developmental stages pass and 
we just nudge the baby through them. Flora may still be unreasonable when she 
gets to five, but it will be about other things – not her right to eat the 
remote control.

Take weaning for example. Flora allows some pureed food into her mouth but 
spits most of it out. She grabs the spoon and flicks the food round the room or 
up-ends her plate. Once she gets teeth, I will worry that she will choke on 
mashed banana – let alone slices of apple. Nowadays, there is the baby-led 
weaning movement, which says I should trust baby Flora to gnaw on finger foods 
rather than spoon in mush going, "Choo choo, here comes the train." This may be 
true, but I can't do it that way. And my other children all learned to eat. On 
a good day they even have their mouths closed.

But first time round I was quite heavily influenced by baby manuals, or by 
anyone who'd ever held a baby. A friend comes round whose baby is a few weeks 
older that Flora.

"I follow Gina Ford," she says, in the hushed tone one uses in a confessional. 
"My neighbour thinks I'm terrible."

Gina Ford, for anyone who doesn't know, lays out a firm routine for babies.

"If it works for you, that's fine," I say. If you lined up Ford and my baby's 
regimes there wouldn't be much overlap, but who's to say no routine is better? 
"Y certainly looks a happy baby."

"Y goes to bed at 7pm and sleeps through," says my friend. "I didn't know what 
to do when Y was born. Babies don't come with a manual."

Which is interesting, because two days later, Lydia, who's eight, volunteers 
to look after her cousin's hamster and he does come with a manual. Lydia 
commits it to memory and slavishly brings Wilbur fresh apples and drags me to 
the pet shop to buy a hamster hairbrush and mineral block for his teeth. What 
is most touching is that she thinks Wilbur needs the same standard of care as 
Flora.

"Quick, Wilbur's pooped, I need to clean his cage out," she shrieks.

I explain that Wilbur is not like Flora and does not need changing each time 
he empties his bowels.

"But it's disgusting," she says, changing his bedding anyway. "He can't sleep 
in that."

After a few days, I notice with relief, she loses interest. Flora, perhaps 
sensing the opportunity to regain her sister's attention, suddenly, for the 
first time, rolls over.
