
Y ou visit a place, find it a challenge and a bit foreign at first, but 
gradually fall in love with it. Too soon you're back home, fighting a lump in 
your throat as you unpack your souvenirs. For Mac, slick exec of Knox Oil and 
Gas (Houston, Texas), that's how his Scottish trip plays out. He arrives at a 
tiny coastal village, a man on a mission to purchase the whole place for oil 
exploration and get back to Texas for tea. In the end, he goes home with an 
aching heart and a collection of shells that he longingly sniffs.

So goes the story of Local Hero <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0085859/>. It's a 
film I adore for lots of reasons – but especially the way it evokes a sense of 
place. With Tanera Mòr, an island off the north-west coast of Scotland, up for 
sale, and the resonance between Local Hero and Donald Trump's acquisitive 
adventures in Scotland, it feels like a good time to revisit the movie. Every 
viewing has left me longing to travel to its fictional village, Ferness. 
Finally, exactly 30 years after the film came out, I managed it.

But being Mac isn't straightforward. While the exterior village scenes of 
Ferness were filmed in Pennan, on the Banffshire coast in north-east Scotland, 
the beach was shot way over west, at Camusdarach, and the hotel and pub 
interiors elsewhere again.

With a background in documentary, Forsyth later admitted he wasn't prepared 
for such smoke and mirrors. (Nor, perhaps, are fans who have their picture 
taken in Pennan's famous red phone box. For the film, they built a wooden 
replica in a more cinematic spot.) But what the atomised reality of film 
locations does give you is a template for a road trip that's fabulous, even if 
you aren't nuts about the film.
 A white sandy beach at Camusdarach. Photograph: Alamy 
Being nuts about it, though, I suggest to my brother (along for the ride) that 
on the first night we watch the DVD. After pretty expansive eating atDurn House 
<http://www.durnhouse.co.uk/> B&B in Portsoy, an impeccably renovated 
18th-century mansion that juggles grandeur with cosiness, we settle back to 
watch but fall asleep, exhausted. That's OK: I know the script well enough to 
assure you that practically any of the tourist attractions of the area are 
supported by the film. A visit to a whisky distillery? Try these lines:

Urquhart: "I want you to try this Scotch. It's 42 years old."

MacIntyre: "Old enough to be out on its own."

We choose Glenglassaugh Distillery <http://www.glenglassaugh.com/>, near 
Portsoy, which was revived in 2008 after 20 mothballed years. It seems to run 
on passion and offers a history-rich tour in a working environment, not a 
museum.

Staring at the night sky, hoping for the aurora borealis? Happer, the head of 
Knox Oil and Gas – played by Burt Lancaster – is an astronomy obsessive who 
insists Mac calls in with sky reports: "Anything out of the ordinary, you 
telephone me. Night or day."

It's the scenery that steals the show, though. Denis Lawson, who played the 
inscrutable Gordon Urquhart (hotelier, accountant, lover, barman), says that's 
part of the reason the film remains his favourite job: "The landscape was like 
another character, intrinsic to the film. For the beach scenes I remember the 
excitement, every day, when we left the production caravans behind the dunes. 
To get on to the set you'd walk on this narrow, wooden, latticed walkway up 
through the dunes."

For us the drama is amplified by a biblical parting of clouds just as we reach 
what is known in the film as Ben's Beach (Ben is the old beachcomber whose 
ancient rights over the sands are a spanner in the oil works). This is a coast 
with none of the monochromatic perfection of brochure beaches. Between the 
islands of Rum and Eigg out west, the sand, the grasses and the rocks under 
your feet, there is colour and contrast everywhere.

Our base in this area, the Old Pines <http://www.oldpines.co.uk/> in Spean 
Bridge, doesn't look much – a modern chalet in a forest – but offers such 
inventive cooking and a dazzling highland outlook packed with trails that we 
don't care. Ben Nevis, Loch Lochy and the Great Glen are your neighbours.
 Pascal Wyse in the red phone box in Pennan, the village used in the film 
Local Hero. Photograph: Dominic Wyse 
"One of the extraordinary things up there is the light," says Lawson. 
"Normally you shoot early, but we would begin around noon and prepare scenes 
for the gloaming, sunset light. It's just gobsmacking. We had a couple of props 
guys on the beach who would spend hours throwing water across it to catch the 
light. And the thing I remember about Pennan was a night scene. We had three 
hours of darkness to get the shots. Normally you run out of light; we were 
running out of dark."

Pennan looks just as it did in the film, but of course can't be the film. 
There's barely anyone around, and I feel like I'm ghost-hunting. The only 
evidence is a weather-beaten plaque on the hotel wall: "Bill Forsyth's 
worldwide success was filmed in and around Pennan." After a quick call from the 
phone box, we travel a few miles east to the even more precarious Crovie, so 
tight up against the water that cars are pointless, and groceries must come 
down via wheelbarrow. Just relish not being able to park, as it launches you 
into cliffside rambles. From above, Crovie looks vulnerable, dwarfed by rocks 
and water.

It's easy to miss the two small film stills just inside the doorway of the 
Ship Inn, Banff <http://www.theshipbanff.co.uk/>. This was the set for the bar 
scenes, and we drop in after taking a bird's eye view of Cullen, its beaches 
and red sandstone rocks, known as The Three Kings, from the grand viaduct. In 
this bar, Mac drunkenly admits he wants to swap his life with Gordon. "I'll 
make a good Gordon, Gordon," he says.

But it's not to be. Mac is sent back in Happer's helicopter, superfluous in 
his boss's new dream for Ferness. It felt right to end our journey with a 
glimpse of Loch Ailort, where Forsyth filmed Mac flying towards the horizon. 
While he has to consider how his life has been turned on its head, you can stop 
off at theGlenuig Inn <http://www.glenuig.com/>, stock up at Macdonald's 
smokehouse and pack up your shell collection.

• The trip was provided by McKinlay Kidd (0844 873 6110, 
seescotlanddifferently.co.uk 
<http://www.seescotlanddifferently.co.uk/local-hero-coast-to-coast/>), which 
offers a Local Hero Coast to Coast trip from £565pp. The five-night, two-centre 
trip includes guesthouse accommodation with breakfast, four dinners, a 
dolphin-watching boat trip, scene location cribsheet and a Local Hero DVD to 
watch before you leave
