
Summer is perfect for picnics, parties and enjoying the great outdoors, while 
autumn is blissful when you’re curled up with delicious food and a gripping new 
book. To celebrate the second half of the year, Président is encouraging 
Guardian readers to savour the moment with some suggestions for seasonal 
activities to try, and simple ways to relax and unwind. Plus, look out for 
recipes with brie, camembert, emmental and butter – from delicious snacks to 
easy midweek meals – to add a bit of indulgence to the everyday.

Savouring the moment is a concept very familiar to Président. Its range of 
cheese and butter does everything from completing afternoon tea to keeping the 
fridge stocked with staples for snacking, cheeseboards and recipes.


Président uses traditional artisan methods to make its cheese and butter, so 
its brie is always buttery, going beautifully with fresh, crusty bread and as a 
wine pairing with crisp sauvignon blanc. The camembert is bold, but creamy 
enough for everyday cheeseboards, and works well with a medium-dry cider. And 
Président’s emmental has a sweet, nutty flavour that triumphs with a port or 
dessert wine.


Président butter is made from high quality creams in Normandy – turning jacket 
potatoes into an indulgent treat. It’s also versatile: perfect for cooking, 
baking and spreading on toast.


To help you savour the moment, Président is giving away a very special hamper 
to one lucky Guardian reader. Ideal for a small party – or a luxurious picnic – 
the hamper is presented in a wicker basket and contains one pack of Président 
unsalted butter; 200g of Président Brie; 250g of Président Camembert; 200g of 
Président Emmental; 135g of Président Camembert Crème; green olives; sun dried 
tomatoes; and one bottle each of white and red wine to enjoy.


For your chance to win this delicious prize, simple enter your details below.


Terms and conditions

 *  The Président Hamper prize draw (the “Prize Draw”) is open to residents of 
the UK aged 18 and over.

 * The Prize Draw is not open to employees or agencies of Guardian News & 
Media Limited (“GNM” or the “Promoter”), their group companies or family 
members, freelance contributors to GNM, or anyone else connected to the Prize 
Draw. 
 * Entrants into the Prize Draw shall be deemed to have accepted these Terms 
and Conditions. 
 * To enter the Prize Draw you must enter your details as above. No purchase 
is necessary. If you have any questions about how to enter or otherwise in 
connection with the Prize Draw, please emailcompetitions.glabs@theguardian.com 
<mailto:competitions.glabs@theguardian.com> with “Président Hamper prize draw” 
in the subject line.

 * Only one entry per person. Entries on behalf of another person will not be 
accepted and joint submissions are not allowed. You are responsible for the 
cost (if any) of sending your Prize Draw entry to us. The winner shall be the 
owner of the email address from which the selected winning entry is sent. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for entries that are lost, delayed, 
misdirected or incomplete or cannot be delivered or entered for any technical 
or other reason. Proof of delivery of the entry is not proof of receipt by GNM. 
 * The Prize Draw closes at 23:59 on 10 July 2016. Entries received outside 
this time period will not be considered. 
 * The winner will receive a wicker hamper containing: one pack of Président 
unsalted butter; 200g of Président Brie; 250g of Président Camembert; 200g of 
Président Emmental; 135g of Président Camembert Crème; green olives; sun dried 
tomatoes; one bottle each of white and red wine. Only one winner per household. 
GNM accepts no responsibility for any costs associated with the prize that are 
not expressly included in the prize.

 *  The winner will be selected by way of a random draw from all entries 
received in accordance with these Terms and Conditions. The draw will take 
place on or after 11 July 2016. 
 * The winner will be notified by phone or email on or after 12 July 2016 and 
given details of how to claim their prize. If a winner does not respond to GNM 
within 14 days of being notified of their win, the winner’s prize will be 
forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to select another winner in accordance with 
the process described above (and that winner will have to respond to 
notification of their win within 14 days or else they will also forfeit their 
prize). If a winner rejects their prize or the entry is invalid or in breach of 
these terms, the winner’s prize will be forfeited and GNM shall be entitled to 
select another winner. 
 *  The prize will be sent to the winner by 23 August 2016. 
 * The name and county of the winner can be obtained after 10 August 2016 by 
sending a stamped addressed envelope to the following address: Guardian 
Creative, Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. 
 * The prize is non-exchangeable, non-transferable and not redeemable for cash 
or any other prize. 
 * GNM reserves the right to substitute the prize with an alternative prize of 
similar value in the event that the original prize offered is not available. 
 * The winner may be required to take part in promotional activity related to 
the Prize Draw and the winner shall participate in such activity on the 
Promoter’s reasonable request. The winner consents to the use by the Promoter 
and its related companies, both before and after the closing date of the Prize 
Draw for an unlimited time, of the winner’s voice, image, photograph and name 
for publicity purposes (in any medium, including still photographs and films, 
and on the internet, including any websites hosted by the Promoter and its 
related companies) and in advertising, marketing or promotional material 
without additional compensation or prior notice and, in entering the Prize 
Draw, all entrants consent to the same. 
 *  The Promoter shall use and take care of any personal information you 
supply to it as described in its privacy policy, a copy of which can be seen at
http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/help/privacy-policy>, and in accordance with data 
protection legislation. By entering the Prize Draw, you agree to the 
collection, retention, usage and distribution of your personal information in 
order to process and contact you about your Prize Draw entry, and for the 
purposes outlined in paragraph 12 above. 
 * GNM accepts no responsibility for any damage, loss, liabilities, injury or 
disappointment incurred or suffered by you as a result of entering the Prize 
Draw or accepting the prize. GNM further disclaims liability for any injury or 
damage to your or any other person’s computer relating to or resulting from 
participation in or downloading any materials in connection with the Prize 
Draw. Nothing in these Terms and Conditions shall exclude the liability of GNM 
under law for fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation, or for death or personal 
injury resulting from its negligence. 
 * GNM reserves the right at any time and from time to time to modify or 
discontinue, temporarily or permanently, this Prize Draw with or without prior 
notice due to reasons outside its reasonable control (including, without 
limitation, in the case of anticipated, suspected or actual fraud). The 
decision of GNM in all matters relating to the Prize Draw is final and no 
correspondence will be entered into. 
 * GNM shall not be liable for any failure to comply with its obligations 
relating to this Prize Draw where the failure is caused by something outside 
its reasonable control. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited 
to, weather conditions, fire, flood, hurricane, strike, industrial dispute, 
war, hostilities, political unrest, riots, civil commotion, inevitable 
accidents, supervening legislation or any other circumstances amounting to 
force majeure. 
 * The Prize Draw and these Terms and Conditions will be governed by English 
law and entrants to the Prize Draw submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the 
English courts. 
 * Promoter: Guardian News & Media Limited, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London, 
N1 9GU. 