
It took six years of trying for me to fall pregnant. My husband and I had 
given up on the four and a half years of fertility treatment and decided to go 
down the route of adoption when it finally happened. It wasn’t really until the 
20-week scan that I allowed myself to believe I was going to have a child, and 
when we found out she was a girl, we started talking about names, daring to 
think about her future.

Three weeks later, we were packing the car to go on holiday when I felt a 
sharp stomach pain, followed by the feeling that my hips were trying to open 
up. My mother-in-law, who used to be a midwife, reassured me it was probably 
fine, and when we got to hospital, the doctor agreed, even when I began having 
what I now realise were contractions.

Still, we hung around, just in case. Then the doctor told us, “I’m so sorry – 
it is labour.” Had she not said “sorry”, I wouldn’t have worried – lots of 
babies are born prematurely, after all – but what I hadn’t realised is that 
there’s only around a 20% survival rate for babies born at 23 weeks. I thought 
everyone was overreacting as they fussed around me, and assumed the flurry of 
injections to slow my progress and dose up my baby’s lungs with steroids would 
stop the labour. They didn’t.

It was only when I was wheeled into a room filled with equipment to 
resuscitate my child that the truth hit me. I burst into tears and suddenly 
felt very afraid. Around teatime, I was moved by ambulance to a bigger 
hospital, which was encouraging, especially because the contractions were by 
now frequent and painful.

I was taken straight to the labour ward, where the consultant neonatologist 
told us it was not routine to try to sustain the life of a baby born as early 
as ours and that, if we let nature take its course, our child’s underdeveloped 
lungs would not cope and she would die quickly after birth. Even if they 
provided life support, there was only a small chance of it working and a high 
risk of severe disabilities. But for us it was simple: we wanted our daughter 
to have every opportunity to live.

After a surprisingly natural birth, our little girl arrived at 4am. Wrapped in 
a plastic bag for warmth and a tiny hat, she was held out for me to kiss before 
being whisked off to an incubator. Weighing only 520g, she looked like an 
alien, her eyes fused shut and her skin red and taut over her bones. She was 
impossibly small and I loved her with sudden, violent ferocity.

An hour later, we were reunited in the special care baby unit, where she was 
covered in tubes and felt horribly distant. Day after day, I’d sit for hours 
with my forehead pressed against the incubator, reading stories and singing to 
her. There were times when it was almost too much to bear, because it was so 
clear she should still be inside me – a feeling that was only compounded by 
having to ask permission to touch her.

The first week was the hardest, because it was so unclear if she’d survive, 
but it was also the most beautiful, because we were finally a mum and dad. I 
refused to allow myself any tears, but everything I suppressed seemed to 
surface as I slept, and I often woke up clammy and breathless, having dreamed 
of her funeral.

By her 10th day, it was amazing to be able to hold her. After 15 weeks of 
expressing milk eight times a day, I cried when I was first able to breastfeed 
her. She was in hospital for 144 days altogether, and although it was so hard 
to be without her at nights, it was wonderful to see her grow stronger.

Related: Experience: I spent Christmas on hunger strike in a Tunisian prison 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/25/experience-christmas-hunger-strike-tunisian-prison-lee-talbot>

As the weeks turned to months, her reliance on breathing support went down, 
then up, then down again, but after graduating through less and less invasive 
machines, she finally came home exactly four weeks after her due date. I felt 
as though someone might tap us on the shoulder and tell us to put her back.

Twelve weeks on, she’s still on oxygen, but is doing well. We don’t know what 
lies ahead, but embracing adoption meant we’d already prepared ourselves for a 
child with significant needs. The main thing is that our beautiful and 
resilient daughter is alive.




• As told to Kate Hilpern

Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com 
<mailto:experience@theguardian.com>
