
Is this what the public expected with the election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour 
leader? The shadow education secretary, Lucy Powell, has staggered unions by 
refusing to support an anti-academy campaign at theManchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> school she once attended.

Ten days ago, unions at Parrs Wood high school, a comprehensive near Powell’s 
Manchester Central constituency that is rated good by Ofsted, wrote to local 
MPs and councillors asking them to back a campaign against the school’s plans 
to become an academy. The letter said 85 staff members had attended a meeting 
where it was unanimously decided to oppose the conversion to academy status.

Powell replied that, while the government’s focus on “academisation at all 
costs” was “wrong-headed”, she respected Parrs Wood governors’ decision to 
convert to academy status. She said it was “clear that the government is 
determined that the majority of secondary schools will be academies by the end 
of the parliament”. In fact, this is already the case.

Lucy Powell said that she respected Parrs Wood governors’ decision to convert 
to academy status

Powell also suggested that academy status now would protect the school from 
being forced into it in the future.

A union source said: “The unions are surprised and deeply disappointed as when 
Jeremy Corbyn, and indeed Lucy Powell, came in their opposition to the 
academies policy seemed clear. This school is doing well, so we can’t 
understand why anyone would want to change the model.”

Powell’s office told us on Friday that “things have moved on” since the union 
meeting and that more staff were now behind the governors’ plans, after the 
school staged information meetings last week. Powell added that aLabour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> government would put all types of 
school under greater local government oversight.

Parents take more complaints to school

The number of complaints to Ofsted about schools by parents and the public has 
more than doubled since 2011, Education Guardian can reveal. Areport 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/pl9j3ypdp7u5xyx/ofstedquarterlyreporttomarch15.ppt?dl=0>
 to the English inspectorate’s board records 6,894 complaints about individual 
institutions were received in 2014 – a rise of 47% on 2013, and more than twice 
the figure of 2,892 in 2011. Data for the 12 months to March 2015 show that 
3,920 of the complaints were about child safeguarding.

However, relatively few complaints triggered action from Ofsted. For the 
inspectorate to step in, a grievance must fulfil a set of criteria, including 
that the complainant must already have gone through the school’s own complaints 
procedure.

Only 513 (7%) of complaints in 2014-15 qualified in this way. In that year, 
288 complaints were investigated by a senior inspector and 65 inspection visits 
ordered as a result. Safeguarding concerns, which Ofsted says include 
cyber-bullying, attempted and actual suicides, and self-harming, are said to be 
passed on to other agencies for investigation.

The figure for 2014 equates to a complaint for nearly one in every three of 
England’s 24,000 state and private schools. It is unclear what has been driving 
the rise in complaints though Ofsted said that increased awareness of its legal 
ability to investigate complaints, introduced in 2007, may be a factor.

Grindon Hall decides to look on the Bright side

Finally, the founders of a free school in Sunderland seem to have done a 
spectacular U-turn and accepted proposals to have it sponsored by an academy 
chain based 140 miles away.

In October, we reported 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/13/schools-harris-academy-teachers-ofsted>
 that Grindon Hall Christian school was opposed to the Department for 
Education’s attempt to impose the Stockport-based Bright Tribe chain on them. 
The founders had put out a statement saying the sponsor “had no record of 
improving schools”. They even wrote to Lord Nash, the academies minister, with 
a six-page letter of concerns. But last week, the school’s trustees, governors 
and principalwrote to parents 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/53qc8ehmz4sg1op/grindonletternov15.PDF?dl=0> saying 
“we believe that Bright Tribe sponsorship is the best way forward”.

Parents have been told that no other suitable local academy sponsors are 
available and that the regional schools commissioner, Janet Renou, had outlined 
possible consequences if the school “went it alone”, without sponsorship. This 
included a warning that a poor future Ofsted report could leave the school, 
currently in special measures, with its funding agreement terminated.

Richard Vardy, chair of the school’s parents’ council, says the decision 
calls into question the supposedly “parent-led” free schools movement, with all 
free schools now facing the possible future risk of being absorbed into an 
academy chain.
