
It must look like the worst birthday ever. I’m alone in my local with a huge 
pile of envelopes and a solitary pint of bitter. To an onlooker, I’m friendless 
and miserable but intriguingly popular, given the large number of cards. But 
it’s not my birthday. They can’t see the “With Sympathy” messages and cover 
photos of funereal lilies and orchids that have sprouted among our little 
family sincemy wife’s death 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/the-week-after-my-wifes-death>
 nearly a fortnight ago.

Until tonight, I’ve avoided opening any of this trickle, then torrent, of 
bereavement mail that pours daily through our letterbox as word spreads that 
Helen has succumbed to the disease she faced with such courage for nearly two 
years. I’m wary of tipping myself into a darker place when so much is still to 
be done as we approach Helen’s funeral this week.

This evening, however, badly needing time out, I grab a pile and head to the 
pub. Choosing a quiet corner, I immerse myself in the outpouring of sentiment, 
love and respect for Helen. We Brits may struggle face-to-face to express our 
feelings but are pretty handy with the written word.

So overwhelming is the evidence of her inherent goodness and popularity that 
my own mood turns sunflower-like towards its warmth. What had felt like a duty 
becomes an affirmation of all that I knew of Helen and loved. I start smiling 
like a Cheshire cat, adding for the regulars at the bar a new element (manic 
happiness) to the intriguing theatre of my presence.

Related: The week after my wife’s death 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/16/the-week-after-my-wifes-death>

Half an hour and another pint later, I finish and place the last envelope on 
the towering pile. The very act is like flicking a switch that short circuits 
all the positivity that has built up around me. It’s as if all the momentum and 
goodwill in what people have written is lost in the very act of reading it.

It makes me feel miserable and, perhaps fuelled by the beer, I wonder whether 
the emotional fuck I’ve swerved now beckons. Despite the survivor’s defence of 
reminding myself that I’ve no right to fall apart when Helen didn’t, despite 
all she faced, I feel right on the edge of being overwhelmed.

But then, as so often happens while tottering on the abyss, a hand reaches out 
and pulls me back. My phone rings: it’s my old school friend Tom, from 
Newcastle.

Both Tom and his wife, Gail, have been so supportive and understanding – 
Gail’s sister died of cancer in her 30s. So I perk up and take the call: “Hi, 
Adam, are you positive we can’t help in any way?” We chat, but my mind is 
elsewhere – something in Tom’s sentiment, language and accent have stirred a 
distant memory.I’ve had an interest in, but cynicism towards,life coaching 
<http://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/mar/03/lessons-from-a-life-coach-how-to-get-what-you-want-now>
. Only one bloke, a former scaffolder, Jim Michaels, from Newcastle – like Tom 
– ever convinced me of its substance. His accent helped to still the 
“bullshitometer” whose needle would flicker with most life-coaching shtick. 
Tom’s accent had unwittingly unlocked this memory.

I remember Jim’s maxim: “Positive thinking is worthless. Positive action is 
priceless.” – whose potential nonsense was made credible by the man If I wanted 
to try to keep alive the positivity and goodwill in the cards and letters, I 
needed to stop moaning and take my own “positive action” to do so.

I look again at the pile of paper in front of me, so good at evoking love but 
so poor at prolonging mypositive emotion 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jun/15/happiness-is-being-a-loser-burkeman>
. So what about a virtual memory box to harness that goodwill? Something close 
to the physical box suggested by the brilliant folk at the bereavement charity,
Cruse <http://www.cruse.org.uk/> who had talked me sane in the hospital 
corridor even as Helen lay dying. But this one, containing their mum’s story, 
would always be online whenever and wherever my children, Millie and Matt, 
might need it.

I could create a secure online space to mark Helen’s life, dramatising her 
persona as described by those who’d known her in so many different ways – at 
work, home, in childhood, within the family, or as colleagues and friends. The 
kids could then transcribe comments, add pictures and their own feelings. 
Fittingly, a true “eat the elephant a bite at a time” task so beloved of the 
life-coaching community. It could kick off at once and evolve.

So, one bag of chips and two bottles of Adnam’s Broadside later, I’m slumped 
at the computer. I’ve built a secure template for the virtual memorial that 
will outlive the funeral, keeping alive all the love and respect in the cards, 
as a tribute to Helen that Millie and Matt can access anywhere in the world 
throughout their lives.

I raise a final weary but happier glass to Geordie inspiration.

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym
