
It was meant to be an aid to plain English and a guide to education 
programmes. But an adult learning plan, produced by the Isle of Wight council 
last week earned itself the dubious accolade of being labelled one of the worst 
official documents ever published in the UK.

Dismissed by the Plain English Campaign as "baffling gobbledegook", the 
document was meant to help adults learn how to speak and write in clear and 
intelligible ways. Yet it contains 16 acronyms and a variety of terms, 
including the word "moodle", that have left council officials, councillors and 
adult learning experts scratching their heads.

Among other howlers, the council's adult learning programme is said to have 
revised its quality improvement plan "to focus and cross referenced to the new 
Framework For Excellence so we are working towards meeting future expectation 
enabling a more workable and live document which has met with the approval of 
the LLSC".

Last week mystified councillors attempted – in vain – to halt publication of 
what one called "possibly the worst-written document" ever produced by the 
council. Deborah Gardiner added: "People approved this report without reading 
it, which is ridiculous."

Another councillor, Geoff Lumley, dismissed the document as "absolute 
gibberish" and said he could not "believe that a serious local authority with 
aspirations to improve can issue this".

The guide contains acronyms such as CAF, CFL, CPD, FLLN, FLIF, IAG, JISC, 
NCFE, NIACE, NLDC, NOCN, OCN, PCDL and WFL, and sentences such as the following 
gem: "The QIP is updated timely at the SMT where each of the team are fully 
involved and questioned if need be."

On the subject of computer-assisted learning, the report states that "through 
the successful completion of the 'Putting the "e" into ACL' project we have 
established an online learning environment called Moodle".

Another sentence includes a description of the council's Train to Gain 
programme, which "has been well received within the Isle of Wight council with 
recent pilot with leisure staff leading to the future expectation of this would 
be to have this project open to all departments of the council and have people 
directly referred through self-referral and the PDR cycle".

Marie Clair, of the Plain English Campaign, described the report as one of the 
worst examples of waffle and gobbledegook that she had encountered and said it 
"was clearly cobbled together without anyone reading it properly".

Last week a red-faced Steve Beynon, the council's chief executive, said staff 
were now being reminded of the need to make sense. "This guide is currently 
being updated and the need to use plain English is being reiterated."
