
Government ambitions to build a northern economic powerhouse will “splutter 
and die” unless underperforming secondary schools inManchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and Liverpool improve, Ofsted’s 
chief has warned.

Sir Michael Wilshaw said that secondary education in these cities was going 
into reverse. He called on local politicians to act urgently and champion their 
schools in a demonstration of “grit, imagination, faith and bloody mindedness”.

It is not the first time the chief inspector of schools has highlighted 
concerns about secondary education in the north of England. In hisannual report 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/north-midlands-secondary-schools-ofsted>
 last December, Wilshaw described his alarm over the emerging educational 
divide between north and south.

Related: You can’t build a northern powerhouse if you undermine the local 
schools | Lucy Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/23/northern-powerhouse-local-schools-manchester-liverpool-education-policy>

In a speech on Tuesday 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/sir-michael-wilshaw-speech-at-ippr> to 
the Institute for Public Policy Research, he went further, warning that the 
underperformance of schools in Liverpool, Manchester and neighbouring towns was 
a risk to the government’s vision of a northern powerhouse.

Four in 10 Liverpool <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> secondary 
schools have been judged by Ofsted as either inadequate or “requiring 
improvement”, with the proportion of pupils gaining five good GCSEs (A* to C, 
including English and maths) down from 50% two years ago to 48%.

In Manchester, three in 10 secondary schools are either inadequate or require 
improvement, with the proportion of pupils gaining five good GCSEs down from 
51% two years ago to 47%.

Wilshaw said: “Manchester and Liverpool are at the core of our ambitions for a 
northern powerhouse. They are the engines that could transform the prospects of 
the entire region. But as far as secondary education is concerned they are not 
firing on all cylinders. In fact, they seem to be going into reverse.

“I am calling on local politicians, be they mayors, council leaders or cabinet 
members, to stand up and be counted, to shoulder responsibility for their local 
schools, to challenge and support them regardless of whether they are academies 
or not.”

He added: “I am calling on them to make education in general – and their 
underperforming secondary schools in particular – a central target of their 
strategy for growth.


“Unless they do, I fear Manchester and Liverpool will never become the 
economic powerhouses we want them to be. Politicians need to act. It requires 
grit, imagination, faith and bloody mindedness – qualities that, fortunately, I 
really don’t think are less common in the north than they are down south.”

Ofsted’s north-west regional director, Chris Russell, has written to education 
providers inGreater Manchester 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> and Knowsley on Merseyside 
raising similar concerns. Last summer almost two-thirds of Knowsley 
school-leavers failed to achieve the government benchmark of five good GCSEs.


Russell said too many pupils attending secondary schools in places such as 
Salford, Rochdale, Oldham and Manchester were not prepared for the next phase 
of their education, training or employment.

Manchester is ranked in the bottom eight local authorities in England in terms 
of GCSE attainment, Rochdale recorded the second largest decline nationally for 
the proportion of pupils gaining five good GCSEs, while overall rates of 
progress in English and maths across Greater Manchester are below national 
averages.

“This level of performance presents not only a worrying picture for the 
employment prospects of young people in one of the United Kingdom’s major 
cities, it also presents a real risk to the economic and social stability of 
the area as a whole,” said Russell.

The decline in secondary education in northern cities is in striking contrast 
to the success of London schools, whose results – particularly among poorer 
children – are among the best in the country. The capital’s schools benefited 
from an enormous political push and huge investment via theLondon Challenge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/11/london-challenge-turned-poor-schools-around>
.

Russell pointed out that the Greater Manchester Challenge had also brought 
significant investment to schools in the region, “but the legacy of the £50m 
campaign appears to be one of decline rather than improvement”.

The shadow education secretary, Lucy Powell, called for more powers to be 
developed in local areas to help tackle educational underperformance. “The 
elected mayors of Greater Manchester and Liverpool would be a good place to 
start,” she said.

 “However, the education and adoption bill back in the House of Commons today 
goes in the opposite direction – further centralising powers in Whitehall and 
fragmenting our schools system rather than giving local areas the power and 
responsibility to ensure a step change in school results.”

She also warned that the government’s proposed new school funding formula 
could hit areas like Liverpool and Manchester hard. “Labour supports fairer 
funding but these areas are likely to take a big hit. There should be 
mitigation in the system to protect school standards and ensure a loss of 
funding doesn’t hamstring local areas.

 “If the northern powerhouse strategy is to mean anything it must allow local 
communities the ability to tackle the root causes of low attainment, and not to 
further centralise schools policy.”

A spokesperson for the Department for Education rejected Labour’s suggestion 
that the revised school funding formula would make things worse for cities like 
Manchester and Liverpool.

“This speculation is irresponsible and unfair to schools and parents, as the 
proposed funding formula has not yet been published.

“We are committed to making funding fairer to address the historic[al] 
unfairness in the system – but areas with the highest need will still attract 
the most funding. The introduction of a national funding formula will mean that 
every child, no matter where they live in the country will be funded according 
to need.”

Christine Blower, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, 
described the chief inspector’s intervention as unhelpful rhetoric and his call 
to local politicians to bolster school performance as misguided.

“Many schools in these areas have become academies and as such local 
authorities do not have the ability to intervene or to help these schools 
improve as they do with maintained schools. On top of this local authorities 
have faced severe cuts to their budgets, partly as a result of the academies 
programme.

“Sir Michael should be lamenting this situation and asking politicians to put 
the brake on its education and adoption bill, which will force more schools to 
leave the local authority family of schools and further erode our schools 
system.”

