 Angela Hartnett has an MBE for services to the hospitality industry, a 
Georgian town house two doors down from Samantha Morton and a round-bellied 
Jack Russell called Alfie. Mostly, we talk about Alfie. 'He has very good 
teeth,' she tells me, seriously. She strokes his ears. 'Very good teeth.'
Hartnett's family come from Bardi in Italy, a region sandwiched between Parma 
and Bologna. 'So there's ham to the west,' she says, 'and Bolognese to the 
south. One incredible meal we had in Italy was Christmas 1999, when the whole 
family, about 14 of us, descended on the local restaurant and just ate our 
hearts out. Salami and prosciutto to start, then anolini and spinach and 
ricotta tortelli, then roast pork and beef. It was ridiculously cheap too - 
about £120 for all of us. Plus, in Bardi, it's so, so peaceful. All you can 
hear are crickets, and in the valleys, all you can see at night are the little 
spots of light in people's windows. I love London, I love having Canteen and St 
John Bread and Wine on my doorstep, and shopping down the road in Broadway 
Market, but here you can never hear ... quiet.'

Her east-London street has Christ Church Spitalfields at one end ('where they 
have amazing parties') and the Golden Heart, Hartnett's local, at the other ('I 
adore Sandra, the landlady there. I reckon she should turn the upstairs into a 
restaurant. It would be brilliant. And I could just roll there for dinner from 
my front door.') Jeanette Winterson's organic grocers is over the road, and 
Gilbert and George, for whom the local area provides constant, sometimes seedy 
inspiration, live a skip away. 'I say hello to them in the mornings,' Hartnett 
smiles. 'I love the feel of this street, though of course it can be a bit too 
cool for school for me.'

Hartnett's house, with its plum-coloured front door, and wide, groaning 
floorboards, is grand in its dustiness, like an ageing royal. Stepping into her 
dimly lit hallway, hung with small prints of Italian scenes, the chatter and 
perfumes of Spitalfields Market to the west and Brick Lane to the east seem 
very far away.

Hartnett grew up in Essex, living over a fish-and-chip shop. She did a degree 
in modern history, then, inspired by her Italian grandmother's cooking ('For 
her, being a woman was all about cooking. My uncle, her son, can still barely 
make a bowl of pasta and parmesan'), became a chef, working with Gordon Ramsay 
at Aubergine before rising to head chef at Petrus. She earned her first 
Michelin star at the Connaught in 2004, her MBE in 2007, and, at 39, is opening 
two new additions to Ramsay's string of London restaurants, York & Albany and 
Murano, serving an Italian menu including braised beef cheek agnolotti, and 
langoustine and shrimp risotto. 'I'm still feeling pretty relaxed about them,' 
she says, downstairs in her basement kitchen, 'but I'll be crapping my pants 
soon.'

Unpacking ingredients from west-London deli La Fromagerie beside the Aga, she 
stacks flat peaches and wrapped sausages on top of her housemate's copies of 
OK!. Coleen and Wayne are slowly obscured by raw lunch. Very high heels trip 
past the window as she sweats off a pan of fennel and onions. Loitering by the 
cookery books (Nigel Slater's there, next to Nigella and the River Café) are 
her younger sister Anne, their cousins Phil and Patrick, and Patrick's 
girlfriend Emma, an opera critic, discussing the density of a speciality 
shortbread when dunked in tea. The sun comes out, and they scatter upstairs to 
the walled garden, where Alfie basks by the Mongolian barbecue in a beam of 
sunlight.

When they ask if Hartnett needs their help, her cousins call her 'chef'. Phil 
hangs his postman's tabard on the back of a chair and opens a bottle of wine, 
and Patrick, who worked below her briefly in the Connaught kitchen, blends 
breadcrumbs with garlic, parsley and anchovies to make a stuffing for the 
sardines, which Hartnett prepares swiftly by the hob. She talks as she guts. 
'I've always been into food. Always. My best mate still blames me for her 
overdraft, because I made her come to all these nice restaurants with me 
throughout college. A cheap curry was never enough.' She hands the empty 
sardines to her cousin, and starts to skin sausages. 'I'm the same now. I go 
out to eat all the time, but even after a day at work, I still enjoy cooking at 
home. It relaxes me. It feels methodical. At work it's only 20 per cent food, 
and the rest is management, whereas here, with my family, it's all about 
sitting around and enjoying a huge bowl of pasta.' She holds up a huge bowl of 
pasta, triumphantly, and carries it carefully up the wooden staircase to the 
garden, where the table is set with Connaught china.

There's an air of holiday to the meal - the rare heat, the giggling family 
stories and gentle teases, and the food, spooned generously and casually 
between plans for a weekend drive to Wales, and Phil's account of a morning 
spent delivering mail up the Oxo Tower. 'I used to be a postman too,' Hartnett 
says, 'I loved it. But I was so scared of this one dog that I'd post all their 
mail back in the postbox. Poor buggers.' After the pasta, there are the 
sardines, which are almost sweet in their saltiness, and a spoonful of 
red-pepper stew. Alfie gazes on hungrily. 'When my mum comes for lunch next 
week we're going to get a little chair for Alfie,' says Hartnett drily, 'and he 
can have his own dish at the table. She'll go mad.'

Behind the table, a group of pots hold plants that her family bring when the 
sisters have parties. 'We have a deal. I cook, and they'll make the garden look 
nice. But I'm a lazy cook, really. I mean, if I'm making a tart, usually I'll 
buy the pastry. I find it easier to cook in Italy - everything's right there, 
to hand. If you're by the sea, you know, you'll have fish. When we visit my 
aunt, on the coast, we'll always have a vongole and then some peaches,' she 
says, hands clasped in pleasure.

Her cousins spoon out whole peaches and lemon sorbet, which is melting quickly 
in the sun. The family chatter continues in low gentle rises - they giggle 
about the recent Taste of London festival, where Hartnett was approached by her 
'lesbian fan club' - and they compliment the sorbet with its vodka splash. As 
we clear the plates away, down to the cool of the kitchen, I ask Hartnett if 
her family meals are always so idyllic. She stops and thinks for a second. 'I 
was living in Italy one summer when I was 11, and I really didn't want to be 
there. I wanted to be back in England playing with my mates. My grandma left 
her minestra soup out on the veranda to cool, and I knocked it over. I got a 
good old bollocking for that. And recently, I bought some gazpacho from 
Waitrose, and garnished it to make it look like I'd made it. Then of course 
everybody saw the plastic cartons stacked in the dishwasher. Another time I 
pretended I'd made shortbread ice cream, when I'd just mixed bought biscuits 
into vanilla.' When you've been awarded a Michelin star, apparently the stakes 
are higher, even at home. 'But Gordon Ramsay was the one who taught me not to 
use short cuts. He taught me about standards, and consistency.' Have you ever 
cooked for him at home? 'No!' she shrieks. 'No way. I don't mix my work and my 
social life. He hears about my parties from friends, and then asks why I didn't 
invite him. I'll have him at my 40th birthday though, I suppose.' What do you 
see yourself doing when you leave Gordon's stable? She smiles. 'I think I'll 
end up running a little restaurant, with the dog, in Italy or California, 
either by the sea or in the mountains. Somewhere I can hear the quiet.'

·Share your favourite Italian places on the food blog 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/food/> 
· Murano opens 21 August at 20-22 Queen Street, London W1.

Orecchiette con salsiccia, finocchio e prezzemolo
 (Orecchiette with sausage, fennel and flat-leaf parsley)

Serves 4

2 tbs olive oil

2 small red onions, sliced finely

1 head of fennel, sliced

1 clove garlic, crushed

3 Italian sausages

1 x 400g tin of good-quality Italian tomatoes

100ml water

450g orecchiette

2 tbs chopped flat-leaf parsley

In a pan heat the olive oil. Add the onions, fennel and crushed garlic. Sauté 
without colouring for 3-4 minutes until they start to soften. Add the sausage 
in 1cm pieces and sauté. Add the tomatoes and water and simmer for 10 minutes 
until the sauce has thickened. Meanwhile cook the orecchiette in salted boiling 
water. When ready, drain well and serve with the sauce. Finish with the parsley.

Sardine ripiene di stufato di peperoni rossi
 (Stuffed sardines with red-pepper stew)

Serves 4

For the pepper stew:

3 large Romero peppers, split down the centre lengthways and sliced thinly

2 cloves garlic

4 tbs olive oil

2 sprigs of thyme

200ml water

2 tsp chopped basil

For the stuffed sardines:

8-12 sardines, heads and bones removed

1 small bunch flat-leaf parsley

1 clove garlic

4 anchovies

200g dry bread

zest of one lemon

To make the stew, heat the oil in a pan. Add the peppers and garlic and sauté. 
Add the water and thyme and cook until soft avoiding any colour. Finish with 
the chopped basil. In a food processor add the parsley, garlic, anchovies, 
lemon zest and bread. Blitz together to form a crumb-like mix. Wash the 
sardines and pat until dry. Take the breadcrumb mix and stuff into the 
sardines. Place in a lightly greased dish. Bake in the oven for 10 minutes at 
180°C /gas 4. Serve with pepper stew.

Spaghetti con gamberetti e rucola
 (Spaghettini with shrimps and rocket)

Serves 4

450g dried spaghettini

olive oil

2 gloves of garlic, crushed

1 dried chilli, crushed

20 medium-sized raw shrimps (or prawns), peeled and cleaned

a dash of white wine, to deglaze

6 large tomatoes, quartered and de-seeded

2 handfuls of rocket

Cook the pasta. Put some olive oil in a large frying pan. Add the crushed 
garlic and chilli. Lightly sauté but do not allow to colour. Add the shrimps or 
prawns and cook until pink - about a minute. Deglaze with a dash of white wine. 
Add the tomatoes and allow them to break down to form a sauce. Drain the pasta 
and toss in the sauce. Finish with the rocket and serve immediately.

Sorbetto al limone con insalata di frutta
 (Lemon sorbet with fruit salad)

Serves 6

250g caster sugar

250ml water

1 tsp clear honey

200ml lemon juice

zest of 1 lemon

In a pan add the sugar, water and honey and slowly simmer to allow the sugar 
to dissolve. Simmer for 2 minutes. Remove from the heat and allow to cool, then 
add the lemon juice and zest. Check the sweetness and, if needed, add another 
spoonful of honey.

Freeze in a container and, as it starts to set, mix with a fork and continue 
to do this every couple of hours until frozen (this prevents large ice crystals 
forming). Serve over a summer fruit salad - I like using peaches, strawberries 
and basil.
