
Sorry, madness out there, did I miss anything? Just the progress report, right 
so before we start – anyone want me to open a window? Rosie? Spot of fresh air? 
Why? Well we’ve all read the advice on menopausal women in the workplace – I 
certainly have – so here’s what I think we should do – is anyone in this room 
menopausal? Climacteric, if you’d rather? Because I totally get some of you 
might be desperate to have a hot flush or be feeling sleepy, ha, not you, Des, 
and suffering from, God, what was the other thing, right – forgetfulness – 
anyone?

Look – please bear with Jess – hate to be the one lifting the taboo, but I 
strongly feel that if the science says women are going to have serious 
cognitive issues for 15 years – sorry, excuse me, no I don’t mean to talk over 
you, Amal, thanks, in a second, Sarah – but I have been researching this. 
Right, that’s the upper level, but they definitely say that’s how long you 
might be suffering, so to speak – not you obviously, Karen, unless you’re 
hitting the perimenopause with all the challenges to self-esteem that entails? 
Oh great, you’re still menstruating? I was coming to that – just a moment, Thea 
– if anyone’s at the impaired functioning place in their cycle, just say, and 
we’ll do our best to accommodate, right, Des?

Because – sorry, I read a whole article about this – I totally get it can be 
the most creative aspect of the menses, but there’s a proven unpredictability, 
so if any of you are feeling, just speak up if this applies – any irrational 
anger or irritability? Look, Kirsty, with respect, I think you might want to do 
a little homework before dismissing my argument, we could just Google hysteria 
now if you like – no need to slam the door! Oops, I think someone maybe just 
proved my point there!

Related: Modern tribes: the silent retreat evangelist 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/09/the-silent-retreater-modern-tribe-catherine-bennett>

So where had we got to? Lack of progress, OK, Rosie, yes I know you’re chair, 
the first point I wanted to make, if I may, is the very slow progress we seem 
to be making here. Any ideas why?
