
When I started writing about our woodland shelter, I promised myself that I 
wouldn't merely narrate our small successes but would also, for the sake of 
honesty, share our many failures. And so this week I'd like to mention what has 
been, so far, our biggest failure: guests.

Ironically, this is the part of the project that I thought would be easiest: I 
thought that if you set up a shelter in a beautiful woodland offering rent-free 
accommodation to people who were undergoing some sort of personal crisis (be it 
bereavement, breakdown, separation, addiction or whatever) there would be a 
queue of people wanting to come. And in fact we do get 20 or 30 enquiries every 
week from people across the country who are desperate to come. But that first 
contact rarely translates into an initial visit, let alone a long-term stay. 
Often we reply to an email or spend a long time on the phone and never hear 
back.

There are, I suppose, many reasons for that. The most obvious is that the sort 
of people we envisaged helping are probably in a chaotic stage of their lives 
and (from what I remember of my own personal meltdown years ago) might be 
struggling to make a cup of tea let alone pack their bags. Others are probably 
put off by the fact that we're a dry and drug-free house. Some of the people 
who contact us are the friends, or parents, or grandparents, of someone they're 
trying to help, but actually that person has no intention of being helped, or 
not here anyway.

But as well as those reasons, I suspect we're also if not to blame, then 
somehow part of the problem. Some people might be put off by the fact that we 
expect them to work when they're here; others might be wary of the fact that we 
have a chapel and are, very quietly, a Christian household; some might just not 
like the sound of the place or of us, and that's fair enough.

That's not to say we're not overwhelmed with visitors. Every week we have a 
handful of people we've never met before sitting at our table: many are just 
keen to have a nose round, and that's fine, sort of. Others are volunteers who 
want to get out of the office and lend a hand, and that's great. Some are 
trying to see how they might do something similar, and good luck to them. But 
it still feels to me as if this place simply isn't serving its primary purpose: 
to offer shelter to those who need, rather than who choose, to come. We still 
seem to be laying the mythical "extra place" at the table for the privileged; 
washing the feet, metaphorically, of those who have very manicured toes.

It's true we have got a long-term guest here, and he was of no fixed abode 
before coming, so we are doing something. And we've only been "live" for a few 
months, so perhaps I'm expecting too much. But in my experience a place like 
this only comes alive when at its very centre are those who have had a raw deal 
from life. Something miraculous happens when you build a household or a 
community around the uninvited and the broken. That's how a community avoids 
becoming a ghetto, becoming conceited or middle-class or just up itself.

I always have in my mind the various dining tables we've seen in comparable 
shelters around the country: tables at which, say, a man covered in tattoos is 
sat next to a gentle widow, where a troubled teenager might be next to a cheery 
refugee. Watching them simply pass the butter to each other, you get a sense 
that they're putting their troubles into perspective, that they're 
rediscovering their self-esteem through recognising, and helping, others.

We're a very long way from having such a rich variety of guests. Our table 
often seems part of a bourgeois, blind-date dinner party without the booze. I'm 
not, I hope, being an inverted snob, because it's not a question of class. It's 
just that we've got the balance wrong: it feels as if we're constantly catering 
and making beds but are rarely, actually, being truly charitable.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones
 <http://www.theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones> or visit 
windsorhillwood.co.uk <http://www.windsorhillwood.co.uk>
