
The dilemma I am a 34-year-old woman who (probably like many others) lies 
awake from 2 or 3am most nights. There is a calm but doggedly persistent stream 
of thoughts, images and scenarios running on a loop in my mind. I think about 
moving to our new house, all the things we won’t have and will strive to get 
but don’t really need, how life is just an accumulation of stuff and then you 
die, how none of my things are packed and how I pretend to like change when 
really I don’t. I think about the man at work who would have an affair with me 
if I said yes. I think about what we might do and how badly it would end, 
whether I am too weak and greedy for monogamy. I tell myself I should be a 
better mother, and then wonder if I have time to have another child. I don’t 
know what to do to break this cycle. I am very tired.

Mariella replies Aren’t we all? Well maybe not the entire population, but 
certainly my female contemporaries. Now it seems nighttime anxiety is stalking 
us ever younger. At my age, lying awake fretting about everything from the 
weekly grocery list to the rise of Isis tends to be symptomatic of a much 
broader hormonal malaise. At yours, it’s less dismissible to squander sleep on 
existential angst.

On the plus side, the topics you’re ruminating on are worthy of intellectual 
consideration and interesting enough to be open to broader discussion, unlike 
my Ocado sweats. There’s clearly a lively, questioning mind at work, looking 
for answers and determined not to just blunder through a life ill-considered. 
That’s all good news but an inquisitive psyche like yours often comes with a 
tendency towards depression, not wholly irrational when your thoughts are 
straying to the meaning of life and the big questions we encounter along the 
way.

Lack of sleep is a debilitating health hazard, mental and physical, that 
requires addressing

I do feel you might be in the grip of that black dog, diagnosed in so many of 
us in the developed world. Dealing with your sleeplessness certainly requires 
the help of your GP, who can decide whether to medicate or not. I’ve found that 
a tiny dose of the sleep regulator melatonin, only available on prescription in 
this country but widely used in the US, taken for a couple of weeks regulates 
my sleep patterns and puts me back on the road to restful nights. Try to 
persuade your doctor that it’s worth a try.

I can’t take on the medical side, but I certainly have experience of the 
psychological end of it. Lack of sleep is a self-exacerbating condition. The 
less you sleep, the more you worry, so the less you sleep. Medication may well 
help you to get off that nightly treadmill, but your wakefulness can also be 
mitigated with a little effort from yourself. Airing your worries, however 
trivial, and irrelevant of how downright crazy they seem, is a positive first 
step. Voices trapped inside our heads resound deafeningly and trap turmoil 
between our ears. Exposing such inner angst to oxygen somehow mitigates the 
magnitude of such anxiety and puts big worries into perspective. Talk about 
what you’re feeling with a friend or your partner, have a glass of wine and 
just let it all out. Their response matters much less than the act of exposing 
the demons dominating your dark hours.

Writing things down can be helpful, again as a form of offloading – you might 
even be feeling a bit clearer simply as a result of writing your letter to me. 
Take it a step further and list every topic as a tangible matter for 
consideration. You’ll find that some of your concerns will naturally fade into 
insignificance the moment they are captured in ink and required to rise to the 
credibility of a tangible worry.

Then there’s the issue of how you approach the night. This may seem obvious 
advice but getting yourself into the right headspace for sleep isn’t something 
that all of us can take for granted. Some people simply need to wind down a 
little more systematically. A hot bath, a few drops of lavender oil, a relaxing 
nighttime tea, less alcohol – and plenty of exercise and fresh air during your 
waking hours – will all help you to unwind when you approach your bed.

Substituting technology with a book, either gripping or totally dreary, also 
makes a huge difference. Avoid the unhelpful influence of the tablet’s blue 
light. Having succumbed to using my iPad as a bedtime reading tool – and 
failing to resist incoming emails and the occasional Amazon detour – where once 
sleep came easily, if lightly, I found myself still propped on my pillows at 
3am like an insomniac student. Eschewing bedroom technology for a 19th-century 
novel proved much more conducive to a good night’s sleep.

So no instant cures, I’m afraid, but hopefully plenty to refocus your mind. 
Take comfort from knowing you are one amid a large community fretting through 
the small hours. Lack of sleep isn’t an inconvenience but a debilitating health 
hazard, mental and physical, that requires addressing. Don’t feel ashamed about 
taking it seriously and expecting others to do likewise.


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
