
I have a horrible feeling my little curved knife ended up in the bin. 
Technically a chestnut knife, bought from the man who sets up his stall on the 
edge of Rome’s Testaccio market from time to time, I scored many nuts with it. 
However, over the years this short knife with a wooden handle and sickle-like 
blade proved itself to be ridiculously useful; for peeling apples, zesting 
lemons, hewing off bits of parmesan that were on the right side of scraggy, 
scraping mussels, prising open sardine tins that had lost their rings, and 
trimming artichokes like a Roman. I think it was probably hidden among the 
great pile of artichoke debris that was scooped up and shoved in the bin. I 
feel disproportionately sad about my ¤3 knife and, despite my suspicions, keep 
hoping that, like the lost bottle opener, it will turn up, dusty but intact, 
under the fridge.

The lost knife was the most used and loved member of my kitchen bits and 
pieces, things that have grafted themselves on to my cooking life in an 
essential, almost superstitious way. Most of the things in this group are, like 
the chestnut knife, not necessarily used for the purpose for which they were 
intended: a really heavy bowl in which I make mayonnaise; a jam jar with a 
checked lid that is just right for dressing; the double coat hanger I use to 
dry pasta; an old iron bought at Porta Portese market that I use when something 
calls a for heavy weight; the strand of spaghetti that sits in with the wooden 
spoons to test cakes for doneness (the strand is changed from time to time!).

I am just as interested in other people’s bits and pieces. My friend and 
teacher Carla has her grandmother’s wood-and-metal dough scraper, which she 
uses in both likely and unlikely ways. My mum has a pair of short – and I think 
awkward – tongs that came free with something many years ago, used like 
extensions of her hands in the kitchen. Alice has her ancient pasta cutter that 
snips fluted strips for her jam tarts. My Sicilian teacher, Fabrizia Lanza, has 
a wooden roller she bought in a hardware shop in the US – it was meant for 
wallpaper borders, but is just the thing for rolling the marzipan strips for a 
Sicilian dessert calledcassata. My Neapolitan teacher Daniella has a cherry 
stoner that doubles as an olive pitter.

When I first came to Italy 11 years ago – with nothing – I had the chance to 
start again in terms of kitchen equipment. I took my lead from cooks I liked, 
and those whose food I wanted to eat, most of which was prepared in pretty 
ordinary kitchens, on straightforward stoves, with basic equipment. This was 
what appealed to me, since it’s more inclusive and uncomplicated, practical and 
resourceful – rather like Italian food itself. Also I simply don’t have the 
space for lots of things. Over the years I have accumulated a set of kitchen 
equipment that serves me well.

This is not an inventory though, nor is it a definitive list of essentials, it 
is not even complete list: I have not gone into details about knives, bowls, my 
lack of baking equipment, or my rubber spatulas (of which I have many). It is 
simply some thoughts about some of the things that are particularly useful in a 
kitchen where a fair bit of Italian food is cooked.

For drinking

First things first, coffee. Living in Italy has converted me to the moka pot. 
I have a two-cup, three-cup and six-cup sitting like unpacked Russian dolls 
next to the stove. Not everyone likes coffee made in a moka, but I do; with the 
correct coffee grind, it has an enormous full flavour and intensity. It is a 
simple device, top and bottom screw together to enclose ground coffee in a 
compartment between the two. It is quite straightforward, but needs a bit of 
patient attention at the beginning; the right amount of water and small 
mountain of coffee, the low but steady flame underneath but then you are 
rewarded with a pleasing gurgle, and rich scent as the coffee erupts from below.

I am also really fond of my stout Duralex glasses (which my four-year-old 
calls Durex glasses) for water and wine, wobbly puddings and chopped fruit. 
They bounce too, but only once, so if you don’t catch them, they smash into 
glass pebbles which skittle everywhere.

For the stovetop

Getting a large, taller-than-wide 6-litre lightweight pan was revelation to 
me. I call it thepasta pan, as that is what gets cooked in it most of the time. 
I do stick to the litre of water for every 100g of pasta rule of thumb, 
otherwise the pasta becomes claustrophobic and doesn’t cook properly. Cooking 
400g of pasta at a time means that the 4-litre mark is written in calcium on 
the inside of the pan. The weight is important, meaning it is manageable even 
when full of boiling water.

A wide sauté or frying pan with a long handle can happily accommodate both 
pasta and sauce, its weight and long handle making that nifty flip of the pasta 
relatively easy.

Italians cook meat on the stovetop, slowly braised or pot-roasted. For this I 
use adeep copper sauté pan, almost worth more than everything else put 
together. It is my favourite object in the kitchen, not least because it was a 
present from my family for my 40th. It is an absolute joy to use, cooking 
things evenly and beautifully.

Essential to me is a heavy casserole, which I call my peperonata pan, for the 
vast amounts of stewed pepper I make in it. I also use it for stewing fruit, 
beans and lentils, soup and more soup.

For fresh pasta

All my teachers are quite insistent that pasta (and pastry and dough) should 
be kneaded and rolled on awooden surface, which imparts a desirable texture. 
This wooden surface is called aspianatoia, and can be any large stable surface 
of neutral wood, most commonly a simple board (at least 40cm x 80 cm) with a 
raised lip that hangs over the edge of the table to keep the board steady 
during the forceful kneading. If you are rolling your own pasta, you will need a
mattarello, a long tapered rolling pin (and a Bolognese nonna to show you how). 
I have neither a mattarello nor a Bolognese nonna. I use a once dismissed, but 
now beloved,Imperia pasta roller <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZlQqq1svRk>.

For draining

Get a good-sized colander with feet so it can be plonked in the sink ready to 
receive pasta or vegetables. If you are cooking ravioli or gnocchi, a spider 
strainer orbig slotted spoon is useful for lifting the more delicate pieces 
that would be crushed by a too quick drain from the pan. Some people don’t 
drain any pasta, but use the slotted spoon for short shapes, and lift long 
shapes out withlong tongs. I have a wooden pair that are heavily singed.

For scooping

As you probably know, pasta cooking water, cloudy with starch that has seeped 
from the pasta as it cooks, is fundamental – an ingredient, really – in pasta 
dishes like carbonara where a good glug of it helps to emulsify the cheese and 
egg into a sauce. Even when it is not fundamental, you will often notice that 
recipes tell you to add a little pasta cooking water to loosen or lengthen the 
sauce. I was forever sloshing the lot down the sink until I kept a jug by the 
stove to remind myself to scoop some out of the pan.

For smoothing

I am not sure I have ever been in an Italian kitchen without a food mill or 
mouli, which is my favourite kitchen tool. It is a simple, old fashioned device 
that consists of a bowl, with a removable perforated plate and crank with a 
curved metal paddle that forces food through the holes: a sort of souped-up 
sieve, really. It purees tomatoes, pulses, fruit, fish and other ingredients, 
separating the skin and tough bits: the wanted from the unwanted. But it 
doesn’t completely obliterate the texture of the pulp as a food processor or 
immersion blender might, it leaves it lively and individual, which is so 
desirable for Italian soups and sauces. It is, needless to say, a bit of a pain 
to clean. So there it is, things commonly used in an Italian kitchen. I’m sure 
you will be able add your own, indeed I am keen to know what you consider 
important for cooking Italian food.

 * Rachel Roddy is a food blogger based in Rome and the author of Five 
Quarters: Recipes and Notes from a Kitchen in Rome (Saltyard, 2015) and winner 
of the 2015 André Simon food book award 