
If your dreams of running your own business are frustrated by the notion that 
you have to come up with a brilliant new idea, think again. The key is to come 
up with a business concept that is relevant in today's market to meet 
customers' needs. The majority of successful new businesses are based on 
existing ideas, products or services with maybe a tweak or improvement in the 
offering, thereby creating its appeal in the current market.

We all develop a unique set of experiences in our work and personal lives and 
this is where we suggest you go hunting for your own new business idea. To 
achieve this you need to undertake a thorough, logical and well-organised 
search – including researching the current market – and the ideas will begin to 
flow.

Our suggestion is that you adopt the following three-stage approach:

1. What skills have you developed?



Look at all your historical experiences. You will have developed specific 
skills in your career, which maybe provide the basis for a business. In 
addition, you should think about the different companies and market sectors 
that you have worked in. Some will have been more interesting and enjoyable 
than others. More than likely, you will have excelled in those elements of the 
businesses that you found most interesting and enjoyable.

Do not confine your thinking to those experiences you have had at work, 
though. Think about the skills you have developed outside of work too. In 
particular, what do you most enjoy doing when you are not working and what 
would you ideally love to spend more time doing? It could be sports related, 
voluntary work or just a hobby, but importantly this pastime could involve 
additional skills. Creating a business that focuses on a hobby can create a 
very satisfying future job.

2. What's going to work? 

Once you have documented your past, you can think about your experience in the 
context of what is happening right now.

Look for areas of growth in the economy for instant inspiration. Look for 
businesses that are succeeding and explore if there is room for you. We live in 
a world where people are prepared, even in times of recession, to pay for 
perceived added value.

Similarly, look around for changes and opportunities that are being thrown up 
through the depressed economic climate. Is a particular market now being 
inadequately served? Staying abreast of local press, business publications and 
trade organisations may suggest some possibilities. The London Gazette, 
available online, publishes a variety of insolvency notices including winding 
up petitions and orders and details of the appointment of administrators and 
liquidators. Keep your eyes and ears open.

The world is becoming a smaller place all the time and this opens 
opportunities for you to be able to source products from afar and take them 
into a more local market. Also, there is a very rich vein of consumer interest 
in locally sourced products.

Think about your friends and colleagues, as you may be able to marry up your 
business and management skills with someone else's physical or creative skills.

Online shopping is the fastest growing area of the retail trade. Can you see 
opportunities to meet consumer need with a product with limited online 
provision?

3. Think long-term 

Finally, do not forget to look forward.

There are certain global and local trends in markets and demographics that you 
should consider when searching for your inspiration. It makes sense to go into 
a business that has future growth potential. The media can be a good source of 
information as they regularly report on new trends – the skill here is to find 
long-term opportunities as opposed to short-term fads.

But possibly the greatest inspiration of all is to try to envisage how it will 
feel to have your own business. Think about the rewards of running your own 
company both financially and emotionally and the benefits of being independent. 
More than anything, this should spur you on. Your personal experience is unique 
and should be the foundation for any new business venture; don't underestimate 
it as it can go a long way to making your business unique too.

This piece was originally published in February 2013 

Chris Garden and Catherine Blackburn have written a book, Employee to 
Entrepreneur: How to Ditch the Day Job and Start Your Own Company 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Employee-Entrepreneur-Ditch-Start-Business/dp/1447929586>

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
