
Barry White 
<http://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2003/jul/10/guardianweekly.guardianweekly1>
’s garden was unbelievable. He’d landscaped it himself to be a tropical garden 
of Eden, with a pool and even a waterfall. One day in the late 70s I was 
lounging outside with Barry and the songwriter Frank Wilson, trying to work on 
some tracks for Barry’s next album.

At that time I practically lived in the house. It was a huge complex in 
Sherman Oaks, Los Angeles, which Barry shared with his wife Glodean. I had my 
own office there and did marketing and odd jobs, as well as writing songs with 
Barry.

Barry and I had been friends since we were teenagers; the first song we wrote 
together was Love Unlimited’s “It May be Winter Outside (But in My Heart it’s 
Spring)”. That day we were writing the song “September When I First Met You”. 
Barry thought it wasn’t working and said he didn’t have any creative juices.

He said: “We’ve got to go to Vegas.”

“Vegas?” I said.

“Yeah, we’re going to go to the room where I wrote ‘Can’t Get Enough of Your 
Love, Babe’.”

Barry could be very stubborn, so we got in the car and drove to Vegas. He 
could do everything well, except drive. He used to scare the hell out of me.

We arrived and checked in – it was the Stardust, I think. Barry took the keys 
to the room. He’d called ahead, as he had to have that specific room. They’d 
moved the person who was in the room so we could have it. It wasn’t a big 
swanky room. It was more like somewhere I would stay.

“September When I First Met You” was about Glodean, as Barry had met her in 
September. The whole song is a metaphor. It could be any month, but it’s about 
vowing to make every day a new September, to remember how you felt when you 
first fell in love and not to take each other for granted.

Barry put women on a pedestal. He wanted to write songs about love and nothing 
else. Glodean and Barry had a wonderful relationship. But when we went on the 
road together, all of a sudden she wasn’t Glodean, Barry’s wife, she was part 
of the Love Unlimited trio. It became about business, and she would call him Mr 
White.

So we were sitting in this stupid room with a little tape recorder, when we 
could have been in his garden. It didn’t really help. In the end we wrote most 
of the song in the car on the way.

We got hungry and went downstairs. Walking past the lounge, we overheard 
someone performing “Can’t Get Enough of Your Love, Babe”. They had no idea that 
Barry White himself was a few feet away, let alone that the song had been 
written in that hotel.

Barry was a unique character, larger than life, but he didn’t like the 
limelight. There was no way he was going to enter the room and take the mic 
that day. He was just too shy.
