
Visitors to The Enterprise Centre <http://theenterprisecentre.uea.ac.uk/> at 
the University of East Anglia’s campus can smell the wood as soon as they 
arrive, although they may not know it comes from nearby Thetford Forest. And 
though most admire the building’s beautiful design, they may not realise all 
new materials were sustainably sourced with a minimum carbon footprint.

Related: Swedish city builds 'passive houses' as part of ambitious CO2 
reduction targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sweden-passive-housing-co2-reduction-targets>

“We wanted to create the ultimate sustainable building,” says professor John 
French, CEO of the Adapt Low Carbon Group which commissioned the building and 
shepherded its construction. “Our brief was to make The Enterprise Centre low 
carbon, both in operation and during construction, and to stimulate the local 
economy.” It’s built on a former brownfield site.

Although Thetford Forest wood is generally regarded as a challenging 
construction material, the team decided to source 70% of the wood used for the 
building from there. To minimise carbon emissions, Adapt and its architecture 
and construction partners thatched straw along the building’s external walls.

This significantly increases insulation and enables The Enterprise Centre to 
satisfy Passive House standards – reserved for ultra-low energy consumption 
buildings. The team uses special software to measure the building’s total 
carbon footprint – not just during construction but throughout its lifetime.
 The environmental benefits of thatched roofs 
Designing and building The Enterprise Centre created economic opportunities, 
too: 35 startups were created and 175 businesses integrated new products, 
processes or services into the building during construction.

At £11m, “the cost came out about the same as a regular university building,” 
says French – and this is a key point. Sustainable architecture and passive 
houses have been built for many years but have failed to catch on among the 
general public – not because people don’t want to live sustainably, but because 
sustainable buildings have been too expensive to build. “We need to demonstrate 
that eco-buildings are on par or cheaper than regular buildings, or otherwise 
[they] will remain marginal,” says French.

The Enterprise Centre is the 2016 winner in the built environment category of 
theGuardian Sustainable Business Awards 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/guardian-sustainable-business-awards-2016-the-categories-and-awards-criteria>
.
