
Margaret Thatcher <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> was 
urged by her press secretary to tackle her “hectoring, strident and bossy” 
public image by showing some compassion for the “unfortunate” in society, 
according to a newly released batch of her private papers.

The documents show <http://www.margaretthatcher.org/> that Bernard Ingham made 
his biggest effort to persuade the then prime minister to adopt a more 
compassionate personal style in the runup to the 1985 Conservative party 
conference at the peak of her premiership.

The papers 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/margaret-thatcher-could-have-been-brought-down-by-westland-affair>
, held at the Churchill Archives in Cambridge, reveal that she tried to fix the 
perceived presentational problem, which had been dubbed the TBW (“that bloody 
woman”) factor, by promoting the Tories’ so-called good communicators in a 
major reshuffle.

Related: Margaret Thatcher 'could have been brought down' by Westland affair 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/05/margaret-thatcher-could-have-been-brought-down-by-westland-affair>

That included promoting figures such as Ken Baker and Douglas Hurd, but the 
papers show it also caused an agonised debate over whether to bring back the 
disgracedCecil Parkinson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/14/tory-peer-cecil-parkinson-retires-house-of-lords>
 two years before his eventual return to the government.

The unexpected attempt by Ingham to repair her public image is contained in a 
diplomatically worded memo dated 24 September 1985, which balanced her assets, 
including being the “dominant person in British politics” and a“decisive, 
strong-minded person”, with her perceived weaknesses.

The most important of these was unemployment, which then stood at 3 million, 
the highest level since the second world war. Ingham said: “I firmly believe 
that there is nothing wrong with this government that a steady, however small, 
fall in unemployment would not cure.”

But he also identified two rather more personal flaws: “A more general 
insensitivity: a belief that you do not care for people – all of this linked 
with so-called ‘cuts’” and a “hectoring, strident, bossy, dictatorial 
personality (which does not survive an encounter with you).”

Ingham suggested that Thatcher needed “a recognition and understanding of the 
problems faced by the unfortunate in our society; this is not to say you should 
appear soft: rather the opposite, you should go out of your way in a deliberate 
but sympathetic manner to acknowledge their problems.”

“You should also have at the back of your mind the guilt complex among the 
‘haves’ about the ‘have-nots’. It is vital that you signal your compassion – 
and don’t deride the word, because that is what many of your supporters think 
you lack – to the ‘haves’ who populate the south-east and the Conservative 
party conference.”

Related: Mark Thatcher 'exiled' from UK over business dealings, book claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/05/mark-thatcher-business-dealings-leave-uk-margaret-thatcher-biography>

Her press secretary conceded she was unlikely to shake off the TBW factor: “I 
do not believe it is possible for a woman in a still-male dominated media to 
deal conclusively with the hectoring, strident, boss point. Just comfort 
yourself with the thought that wherever you go on tour it is the women, of all 
ages, who want to hail you as their equivalent of the female political 
four-minute mile, however they vote. In short, you are you. And stay you.”

There were few signs that Ingham’s advice had much impact. In her 1985 party 
conference speech, Thatcher did stress that she understood what it was to be 
unemployed but she refused to use the caring word and insisted that fighting 
inflation had to take priority over reducing unemployment.

Instead, she used a cabinet reshuffle to promote those with “good 
presentational skills” in the government. As the newly released papers show, 
the then prime minister even seriously considered bringing Parkinson back into 
government two years after he had been forced out after it was revealed that 
his former secretary Sara Keays was carrying his child.

She faced quite an internal pressure to “bring back Cecil” including from 
Norman Tebbit, who told her that “if he doesn’t come back now, he never will”.

One supporter, William Davis, the former editor of Punch, whose advice she 
appears to have paid close attention to, told her that the public had long 
forgiven Parkinson and “his decision to stay with his wife pleased every 
married woman in the country”. He described Parkinson as “handsome, likeable 
and able to communicate in plain English”. An early draft of her reshuffle list 
had Parkinson pencilled in as replacing Tebbit as the trade and industry 
secretary.

The issue was discussed over a Downing Street supper with William Whitelaw and 
her chief whip, John Wakeham, where it seems the advice of her political 
secretary, Stephen Sherbourne, proved decisive. He pointed out that a return 
for Parkinson might be popular among male Tories, but it would not be 
understood by many women. He also warned that the “real fear is that there 
would be further revelations from Sara Keays (who was known to have a book in 
the pipeline) and this time they would rebound on you and not just him”. It was 
enough to block Parkinson’s return for another two years.
