
In the past, the BTec coursework-only qualifications were considered by many 
to be inferior to A-levels. Most elite universities would not accept them, 
grammar schools didn’t teach them and many students had never even heard of 
them.

These days, much has changed. Recent figures from Ucas show that the number of 
A-level students achieving grades ABB (the average grades you need to get into 
the top ranked universities) has fallen by 2,500 over the last year, but the 
number of BTec students achieving the equivalent has gone up by 16%. So, with 
an increasing number of students taking BTecs, doing well and going on to study 
at undergraduate level, are top universities finally beginning to take them 
seriously?

Bethany Alsbury, 21, from Bath, is a first-year experimental psychology 
student at Oxford. She was unwell during her A-levels and rather than retaking 
the year at school she decided to do a BTec in health science at her local 
college. She says doing a BTec gave her a big advantage over other applicants. 
“Straight A stars and Duke of Edinburgh gold – that’s the usually story as an 
Oxbridge undergraduate. A-levels were just about the lessons and sitting around 
in the common room with a revision guide waiting for exams,” she says.

“I did a BTec and we were being marked all the time. There were assignments 
every week so there was a lot more self discipline involved. I had more to 
write about in my personal statement because of all the placements I had to do. 
At A-level it’s hard to fit that kind of stuff around five days at school.”

Despite the qualifications being a similar level of difficulty, Alsbury 
assumed that Oxford would not take applicants who had studied a BTec. “I 
initially thought Oxford wouldn’t look at me,” she said. “But then my tutor 
said ‘No, look they do’ and he said ‘Why not apply and give it a go’ and so I 
did. I was a bit worried but I got an interview and it was never mentioned, and 
it’s never been brought up again.”

According to a spokesperson from the University of Oxford, around 30% of their 
accepted students come with qualifications other than A-levels. While the 
university admits that it does not get huge numbers of applicants coming from 
BTec qualifications to academic subjects (the fine art degree is one notable 
exception), they maintain that one qualification is not necessarily viewed as 
better than the other. “We certainly don’t prefer students with A-levels as 
opposed to vocational qualifications,” said a university spokesperson. “What 
tutors hope to see in applications is a strong record of academic achievement, 
combined with evidence of the student’s passion and commitment to their chosen 
course. We evaluate all candidates on the basis of their individual application 
– not what qualification they were taking.”

Related: Live Q&A: applying to university as a BTec student 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/20/live-qa-applying-to-university-as-a-btec-student>

Other top universities, however, have a different approach. While Durham 
University accepts many different qualifications, including BTecs, they say 
some courses require students to hold specific A-level subjects. Similarly, a 
spokesperson from the University of Cambridge says: “BTecs do not provide an 
appropriate preparation for university for most Cambridge courses, where the 
emphasis is more academic than vocational. As such, these qualifications 
cannot, unless otherwise stated, be used to replace the ‘essential’ and ‘highly 
desirable’ A-level subjects listed for each course.”

For arts and practical degrees, many believe BTecs can give students an edge 
over A-level applicants, as they already have a sizeable body of work when 
applying.Jason Clapperton <https://twitter.com/jasonclapperton>, student 
recruitment manager at London College of Fashion, says: “There are certainly 
some good BTecs available now and as a lot are practical based we see students 
applying with strong portfolios.”

Some experts believe that BTec students are at an unfair disadvantage. Paul 
Grainger <https://www.ioe.ac.uk/staff/CPEN_16.html>, co-director of the Centre 
for Post-14 Research and Innovation at University College London and the 
Institute of Education, says: “BTec students have better self-motivation 
because that’s the nature of the courses. However, elite universities like to 
anticipate that the students will have covered a large amount of the subject 
during A-level so that they can carry on from it.”


Related: Picture yourself in the creative industries? Take a BTec 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/22/picture-yourself-in-the-creative-industries-take-a-btec>

Prof Alison Wolf 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/policy-institute/people/kpi-policy-experts/edpolicy/wolf.aspx>
, an expert on education and skills from Kings’ College London, agrees. 
“Essentially, we’ve got a higher education sector which has got a shrinking 
group of 17- and 18-year-olds and with universities trying to expand 
undergraduate numbers it is generally easier for people with BTecs than it was 
a few years ago,” she says. “But do they see them as exactly the same? No, they 
mostly don’t. Talk to schools and teachers and they will say their experience 
is that different students take the different routes. If they were identical, 
you wouldn’t need them both.”

Alsbury thinks university admissions officers need to realise that candidates 
with a BTec qualification are just as prepared – if not more prepared for the 
standard of work at top universities. “There was a faster pace on the BTec and 
it covered a much wider range of things than A-levels. I have to write essays 
every week for tutorials at Oxford and because of the BTec I’m used to that. I 
felt like I had a head start.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
