
To judge by the media coverage, you'd be forgiven for thinking there hadn't 
been much to Tetbury before Highgrove, Prince Charles's rural accessory and 
food emporium opened just before Easter. According to the 2001 census, Tetbury 
is home to some 5,250 souls; it may have grown a bit since, but not much. So 
why it has suddenly turned into the food theme park of south Gloucestershire is 
something of a mystery.

You'd also be forgiven for thinking that Highgrove is the food shop to end all 
food shops. Actually, it's more HRH's shop for weekend essentials than the Dean 
& DeLuca of the Cotswolds, an urban vision of rural accessories to make 
occasional refugees from metropolitan stress look like candidates for a House & 
Garden photo-shoot. That's a touch unfair, because there is food, of a sort. 
Indeed, Highgrove may equally be described as the prince's sweetie shop, what 
with all the fudge, humbugs, choccies, biccies, honeys, jams and chutneys. The 
vegetables from Highgrove had sold out by the time I got there in the early 
afternoon, but there were plenty of Duchy Originals products lining the shelves.

But one prince's predilections are another man's opportunities. Across the 
road is Quayles, a deli set up last year by David Herbert. He smiles broadly at 
the benefits Highgrove has brought: "It's certainly attracted a lot of 
interest," he says, "and it's keeping everyone on their toes. But people can't 
find all the stuff they want over there, so they come in here for some real 
food" - real food being fine olive oils, pasta flown in weekly from Florence, 
tins of cassoulet and tuna belly, foie gras, unsalted farmhouse butter, wines, 
cheeses and breads - everything you need, in other words, for casually 
classical weekend noshing.

Should you fancy a bit of serious cooking, though, just potter a little 
farther down Long Street and pop into Jesse Smith's, purveyors of fine meats 
(hailing from the Highgrove estate, among other local farms) to the discerning 
carnivores of south Gloucestershire. Don't want meat? How about fish, then? 
Carry on down Long Street, skirting past Somerfield, until you come to The 
Chef's Table, which Michael Bedford set up after packing in his 
Michelin-starred Trouble House Inn just outside town. Upstairs is a long bar, a 
few tables and an open kitchen that turns out really well-prepared rustic 
dishes - moules marinière, Bath chap and mash, roast cod and mash, that sort of 
thing. Downstairs are some of the same dainties you can get at Quayles, as well 
as pâtés, terrines, rillettes, ready dishes made on the premises, vegetables 
(yes, from the Highgrove estate) and fish - not a big selection, but a select 
selection, clear of eye, pink of gill.

So what else do we need? Bread, certainly. May I recommend Hobbs House Bakery 
on Church Street, particularly its wild white loaf, the staple of my breakfast 
table. One day I'll write about Hobbs at length, but for the moment I'll just 
say when you see the name "Hobbs", pop in and buy bread. It's good stuff.

Have we forgotten anything? Of course ... cheese. Not to worry: almost 
opposite Hobbs is the House of Cheese, the great original of Tetbury, opened by 
Jenny and Philip Grant 26 years ago when dedicated cheese shops were thin on 
the ground anywhere, let alone in rural Gloucestershire. I don't suppose it has 
changed much. It's small, and has that inviting lactic pong of ripening cheeses 
as you go through the door. It's a sign of how things have changed, says 
Philip, "that we now sell more over the internet than we do through the shop." 
It is a splendidly opinionated website, too, explaining with pithy dispatch why 
they don't stock certain cheeses.

I don't know about you, but that does it for me: a cheery morning's shopping 
in less time than it would have taken to get round Sainsbury's, and infinitely 
more fun.
