
"You're lucky," says the woman at the cinema as we buy tickets for a newly 
released film. "Until a minute ago, there was a massive queue. You came just at 
the right time."

Later that day, there's a parking space outside our local supermarket – an 
unheard of occurrence. Then I put my hand into the pocket of my old raincoat 
and find a £10 note.

And I begin to feel slightly anxious. I'm not usually lucky, not in these 
ways, so in my mind this guarantees something's going to go wrong.

The first thing that goes wrong is that my mother shrieks from the kitchen: 
"The oven's exploded!"

The glass on the front of the oven has suddenly shattered. Exploded even. 
Narrowly missing baby Flora, who was sitting on a lap nearby. Which, arguably, 
is lucky.

I'm horrified. "It could have maimed her," I say, dramatically. "I'm going to 
phone the manufacturer."

J is more matter of fact. "It's shatterproof glass," he says, "and the oven 
was here when we moved in. It's over 25 years old."

The next thing that happens is that Tilly, who's 11, asks to borrow the 
nail clippers.

"Good girl," I say, approvingly. "Do you know how to use them?"

A few minutes later, she stands at the door of the sitting room and 
giggles nervously.

"I've dropped the clippers down the bathroom sink," she says.

It's an expensive mistake, as after two days of living with the sink being 
blocked, we have to get a plumber to retrieve them from the U-bend.

Then Lydia comes back from her junior orchestra camp to report that her violin 
is trashed. A child tripped over and fell on it. I wonder why, out of about 70 
children, it's her instrument that's been destroyed.

"Was that child who fell on it you by any chance?" I ask.

"No it was not," says Lydia, indignantly. "It was a girl called V." A girl 
whose parents don't ring to apologise.

But, most importantly, my mother-in-law calls to say she feels ill. It's not a 
cold or sore throat but a more serious condition that she's had for a while. 
Some people might not mind if their mother-in-law is ill, but I really like 
mine. She helps us when asked and never interferes. For her to ask for help is 
most unusual.

So we go round to bring her soup, a newspaper and keep her company. Flora lies 
on her sitting room floor, kicking and gurgling joyfully.

Lydia, who knows something is wrong, is unusually quiet and acts like a 
grown-up, bringing in a fresh glass of water and rearranging cushions.

"Is there anything I can do?" she asks, kissing her granny on the forehead.

But there isn't really, so we all sit together watching the August rain 
hitting the windows and feeling the first chill of autumn.

In the quietness, I put an arm round Lydia and look at Flora, recalculating 
for the hundredth time how old I will be when she is 20. As I help her sit up, 
my hands look ancient against her plump pink skin.

When we leave my mother-in-law's house, I buy a lottery ticket. It's only my 
second-ever, because I disapprove of it, but I buy one for a pound's worth of 
daydreaming about no mortgage, leisurely days with my children, a new oven, 
some cosmetic hand surgery and, of course, charitable donations. But it's a 
waste of money. Not only do I lose the lottery ticket before I can check the 
numbers – I forget to have my lovely daydream.
