
1. Aubrey Allen

Aubrey Allen is one of Britain's most respected butchers, supplying numerous 
high-end restaurants, including the three-Michelin-starredWaterside Inn 
<http://www.waterside-inn.co.uk/> at Bray. As you might expect, the shop's deli 
section is none too shabby, either. The salad bar shines and the pre-packed 
(that morning) sandwiches are thick doorsteps filled with quality ingredients. 
There are various other bits and pieces that you could pick up, particularly if 
you're planning a picnic (cheeses, quiches, cured meats, local Four Angels 
cakes), and a hot counter serves light takeaway meals throughout the day (lamb 
bhuna curry, £3.95). Or you could sample a little of Aubrey Allen's butchery 
work in the breakfast sausage bap (£2.50). Said bangers are meaty and 
delicately seasoned, as a good breakfast sausage should be, but they arenot 
mindblowing. Even the best links shrivel a bit when they're held on a hot 
counter.  

• Sandwiches/snacks from £2.50, salad bar from £3.25. 108 Warwick Street, 
Leamington Spa, +44 (0)1926 311208;aubreyallen.co.uk 
<http://www.aubreyallen.co.uk>  

2. Kayal 
 Kayal Keralan curry house, Leamington Spa 
If you've yet to explore the light, sensitively spiced delights of Keralan and 
wider south Indian cooking, Kayal - a newcomer to Leamington Spa, but 
well-established in Nottingham and Leicester - is a fine place to start. Its 
lunch deals, and specifically its thali of several sampler curries (£5.95), 
heavenly dosa, chutneys and rice, are particularly good value, although prices 
are keen throughout. For instance, in the evening, mutton stew withappam (a 
kind of 'lacy' thick pancake) is a very appetising £6.89.  

• Lunch from £3.95, main with rice from around £6.50. 42 Regent Street, 
Leamington Spa, +44 (0)1926 314 800;kayalrestaurant.com 
<http://www.kayalrestaurant.com> 

3. Bread & Co 

All chunky blonde-wood fittings, artisan breads and Belvoir drinks 
<http://www.belvoirfruitfarms.co.uk/>, this busy cafe-takeaway is a useful 
address if you want to pick up a superior sandwich. Options range from salt 
beef and Milanese salami to "the ultimate salad sandwich". Like the breads, all 
the cakes and savouries are bought in from small dedicated producers such as 
local cake maker Sarah Edwards, who has won severalGreat Taste awards 
<http://www.finefoodworld.co.uk/content/GreatTasteAwards/86.html>, and the 
Blueberry Hill Patisserie <http://www.blueberryhillpatisserie.co.uk>(although 
the latter's deceptively good-looking individual bacon and leek quiche tasted 
of little). The amiable, chatty staff also pour decent, if slightly 
one-dimensional, coffee.  

• Sandwiches from £2.95. 94 Warwick Street, Leamington Spa, +44 (0)1926 
831291; also 56 Regent Street, +44 (0)1926 313839 

4. The Granville Arms 
 The Granville Arms, Leamington Spa 
If you fancy heading out into the Warwickshire countryside there are several 
good, affordable gastropubs vying for your pound, namely the new Huff Cap at 
Great Alne (huffcapgreatalne.com <http://www.huffcapgreatalne.com>); the Stag, 
Offchurch (thestagatoffchurch.com <http://www.thestagatoffchurch.com>); and the 
Red Lion, Hunningham (redlionhunningham.co.uk 
<http://www.redlionhunningham.co.uk>). The Granville Arms, halfway between 
Leamington and Stratford, is a good en-route option. A village dining pub that 
has been given a smart (or heretical, depending on your point of view) 
contemporary makeover, it has won numerous regional awards for its sharp, 
energetic locally sourced food, and is listed in several national pub guides. 
It offers a core of familiar mains - a gourmet burger; a pie of the day; 
sausage and mash; quiche, salad and triple-cooked chips - which duck in at just 
under a tenner, and at lunch there are cheaper sandwiches and bar meals 
available. Expect to see regional brewers, such asPurity 
<http://www.puritybrewing.com> and Hook Norton 
<http://www.hooknortonbrewery.co.uk>, represented at the bar.  

• Lunches from £6.95, à la carte mains from £9.50. Wellesbourne Road, Barford, 
near Leamington Spa, +44 (0)1926 624236;granvillebarford.co.uk 
<http://www.granvillebarford.co.uk> 

5. Bernadette's Restaurant 
 Bernadette's Restaurant, Stratford-upon-Avon 
There is much buzz about relative newcomer Bernadette's and, judging by this 
fly-past, it's justified. It's a chic three-storey corner restaurant - all 
black seating and bare, white-tiled walls - that majors in fish dishes, most of 
which are priced way beyond the means of the budget traveller. However, by day, 
Bernadette's offers a cheaper menu of soups, salads, sandwiches and tapas 
bites, as well as oysters and a handful of smaller seafood dishes. A sample 
bowl (£6.50) of smoked haddock and lentil chowder is a highly competent bit of 
cooking (rarer than you might imagine). A deep, generous bowlful, it is 
seriously creamy without being at all heavy, stridently flavourful, properly 
seasoned and chocka with fish and lentils all accurately cooked.  

• Mini appetisers from £2.50, snacks/meals from £4.50 (midday-6pm). 44 Guild 
Street, Stratford-Upon-Avon, +44 (0)1789 415 542;bernadettesrestaurant.co.uk 
<http://www.bernadettesrestaurant.co.uk> 

6. Church Street Townhouse 
 Church Street Townhouse 
A 400-year-old Grade II-listed building recently given a very Sunday 
supplement makeover, Church Street Townhouse is now a 12-bed boutique hotel, 
bar and brasserie. Its standard menu busts this series' self-imposed £10-a-head 
budget, but the all-day bar menu is much more democratic. It includes small 
steel buckets of chips, mini sausages, Scotch quails' eggs and brown sauce, and 
breaded mushrooms with garlic mayo, as well as (after 5pm) mini pies from a 
bar-top warmer. Portions are larger than you might imagine. For £4, I got 11 
reassuringly irregular fish fingers partnered with a pleasantly pointed tartare 
sauce. It's nothing earth-shattering, but it fills a hole with a flourish. The 
Townhouse's ale (half a pint £1.50) is less impressive. It tastes, at first, 
like Bass shandy and later like Tetley's, neither of which is a good thing.  

• Bar snacks £2.50-£4. 16 Church Street, Stratford-Upon-Avon, +44 (0)1789 
262222;churchstreettownhouse.com <http://www.churchstreettownhouse.com>  

7. Haviland's 
 Haviland's caterer, Stratford 
"Stratford's favourite caterer" is at risk of damning itself with faint 
praise. Haviland's could hold its own in towns with much more sophisticated 
food scenes than Stratford's. Split between a charming, modern tearoom and a 
takeaway section, with a kitchen-bakery above, it is a hub of good things done 
properly. In the takeaway, you can pick up excellent cakes and quiche slices 
(their smoked salmon and spring onion quiche was £1.95, and the single best 
thing I ate on this trip), as well as tortilla, soups, sandwiches and salad 
boxes. There is a distinct whiff of quality about the whole operation, although 
Haviland's isn't above pandering to base instincts. Its chorizo and 
onion-loaded potato skins won't win any awards for refinement, but that's the 
kind of filthy, guttural food a man could get addicted to.  

• Cakes from £1.20, sandwiches from £1.95 (takeaway). 4-5 Meer Street, 
Stratford-Upon-Avon, +44 (0)1789415477;havilandscatering.com 
<http://www.havilandscatering.com>  

8. McKechnie's 
 McKechnie's coffee bar, Stratford-upon-Avon 
It's as busy as Starbuck's but McKechnie's puts a firm emphasis on good food 
of sound local provenance. In short, it's the thinking person's coffee stop. At 
around a fiver (eat-in), the sandwiches may sound expensive, but these are huge 
beasts, as thick as encyclopaedias and filled with bright-eyed, bushy-tailed 
Warwickshire ingredients. The cupcakes (£1.75), meanwhile, from local outfit The
Tea Cake Company <>, are feather-light, moist and grown-up, the thick frosting 
creamy and sweet, but not cloying. Curiously, given the fuss they make about it 
- there is even a sign on the wall explaining why the milk is heated to 140°F - 
McKechnie's coffee was a shrug in a cup. An underpowered latte tasted of little 
but warm milk. 

• Soups/sandwiches from £3.50 (takeaway). 37 Rother Street, 
Stratford-Upon-Avon, +44 (0)1789 299575;mckechniescafe.talktalk.net 
<http://www.mckechniescafe.talktalk.net> 

9. The One Elm 

The One Elm is owned by Peach, a regional pub company which turns old boozers 
into modish gastropubs. You know the score: chunky tables, calculated casual 
interior design features, pleasant young staff, an overall air of breezy 
self-confidence. Like Peach's other venues, the Elm makes a big thing of its 
local sourcing and on-point contemporary food cred. Its steaks, for instance, 
come from Leamington Spa butcher Aubrey Allen (see above). From a selection of 
daytime sandwiches and bar meals (cash-strapped travellers could also share one 
of the appealing deli boards, £10.50), a plate of ham, egg and chips was 
creditable, a distinct cut above the high street norm. The large decked outdoor 
area, shaded by a canopy of branches, is a pleasant, secluded spot, safe from 
the tourist hordes. Sit there and nurse a pint of superlative real ale from 
Warwickshire brewery Purity.  

• Breakfast from £2, sandwiches/bar meals, from £6. 1 Guild Street, 
Stratford-Upon-Avon, +44 (0)1789 404919;oneelmstratford.co.uk 
<http://www.oneelmstratford.co.uk> 

10. Marco of Stratford

In the context of a "budget eats" guide, this family-run bistro and deli is 
hard to beat. Refreshingly unpretentious, or a bit dated and gloomy, depending 
on your point of view, it is certainly stuck in a timewarp as far as prices go. 
While the bistro (more of an old-school cafe) knocks out dishes such as 
homemade lasagne with salad and chips, and platters of Italian meats and 
cheeses, for just £5, the deli counter delivers cut-price sandwiches and slices 
of decent hand-raised pork pie (just 60p). The come all wrapped up in clingfilm 
as if your mum had just packed them for a school trip. Marco is owned by a 
butcher and it prides itself on its joints of meat, roasted daily. It may be 
served on ordinary sliced brown bread, but at £1.90 their roast beef and 
horseradish sandwich is great value for money. The beef is reasonably tasty and 
roasted to a perfectly rare pinkness. The staff are friendly, too.

• Sandwiches from £1.80 (takeaway), soup/meals from £3. 20 Church Street, 
Stratford-Upon-Avon, +44 (0)1789 292 889;marcositaliandeli.co.uk 
<http://www.marcositaliandeli.co.uk> 

• Stratford Upon Avon Food Festival <http://www.stratfordfoodfestival.co.uk> 
runs 24-26 September. Tony travelled from Manchester to Leamington Spa with
Cross Country trains <http://www.crosscountrytrains.co.uk>, which has one-way 
tickets from £12.50.
