
What does my art say about me? 

“I am the art; the art is me – this is the inside of my head. There is no such 
thing as age-appropriate dressing…”

And what her art really says about Sue 

Red is an interesting colour for Sue, because it isn’t black. A New Yorker of 
her age and class is usually encased in black, with a camel coat and 
leopard-print scarf to jazz things up. But Sue has rejected this route, and 
much of her old self. There are small clues to her previous work as a cookery 
writer, such as the garlic held by the ladies on her coat, but Sue is a new 
woman.

In her life’s second half, Sue is an artist 
<http://www.suekreitzman.com/art1.htm>, and a magpie one: she borrows from many 
cultures and places, from India, South America, North and West Africa. (Not to 
mention her own British culture, though she only really uses folk art and 
cartoons.) By swirling the colourful and exaggeratedly feminine together she 
turns them into a celebration. A multilayered, many-headed, super-jewelled 
celebration. What is she celebrating? Herself.

The interesting thing about Sue’s celebration is how it’s all mixed up with 
good luck charms. Red can mean different things – passion, excitement – but in 
Chinese culture it’s a symbol of fortune. Sue’s art surrounds her subject 
(herself) with lucky talismans. She’s warding off the devils of boredom, of 
irrelevance, of failing energy, of being ignorable and therefore ignored. It’s 
not that she’s denying her age, more that she’s chasing away the scary stuff 
that often comes with it.

Sue’s art is very definitely female. She rejects passive western female 
sexiness and instead goes for womanhood: witchy, mysterious, flamboyant, 
dynamic. The keeper of recipes and spells. Her art says: “Look at me! I am 
here, with all my heart and experience and personality, and you cannot deny 
me.” Sue is from New York and lives in London, both noisy, tough places that 
crush wallflowers. Her triumphant art – her armour – means that she will not be 
crushed.


If you’d like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email a 
photo tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
