 My questions reflect some of my obsessions. Like me, most chefs I know like 
rock'n'roll, have a movie-fuelled taste for melodrama and have - at some point 
in their careers - engaged in activity that might skirt the margins of 
criminality. At least I'd like to think so. There is one attribute of a good 
cook I had to leave out - as this is, after all, a family newspaper 
· Anthony Bourdain's Les Halles Cookbook is published by Bloomsbury at the 
beginning of October, £20

 Each week, a different guest quizmaster sets five questions per day, Monday 
to Friday. Send us your answers to all 25 questions at the end of the week and 
the first correct entry out of the hat will win a £100 electronic gift card 
from Borders (www.bordersstores.co.uk) <http://www.bordersstores.co.uk)> 

 E1 What famous gourmande wrote: "A man who is rich in his adolescence is 
almost doomed to be a dilettante at the table. Not because all millionaires are 
stupid but because they are not impelled to experiment"?

a) Jim Harrison 

b) AJ Liebling 

c) Talleyrand 

d) Marlon Brando 

 E2 Who said " ... six can dine well at a table. More, even one or two, are 
dangerous, and beyond 10 deadly"?

a) Gordon Ramsay 

b) Emile Zola 

c) MFK Fisher 

d) Lucullus 

 E3 What communist leader worked in Escoffier's kitchen and later at the 
Parker House in Boston early in his life? (He was said to be a favourite of the 
famous chef)

a) Fidel Castro 

b) Pol Pot 

c) Trotsky 

d) Ho Chi Minh 

 E4 Spot the vegetarian: 

a) Jimi Hendrix 

b) Ralph Nader 

c) Hitler 

d) Billy Joel 

 E5 What was the once-ubiquitous Roman condiment "garum" made from? 

a) Finely pulverized gold 

b) Tomato and vinegar 

c) An emulsion of egg yolks, garlic and olive oil 

d) An extract of rotting fish parts 

 Last week's answers to Kevin Maguire's quiz


 1 2 3 4 5 

A c c b b a 

B b d c b b 

C c d b c c 

D c c b d c 

E b b d b b 

 Winner: Madeleine Barry, Derby 

· The full questions and answers are available on the Guardian website: 
www.theguardian.com/g2 <http://www.theguardian.com/g2> 

· Entries must reach Prize Quiz, The Guardian, 119 Farringdon Road, London 
EC1R 3ER by Wednesday October 13. The winner will be notified by Friday 15. One 
entry per person. No purchase necessary. The daily online news quiz is at:
theguardian.com/quiz <http://www.theguardian.com/quiz>
