
Jon Steafel, one of Paul Dacre’s most loyal and long-serving lieutenants, is 
to be replaced as the deputy editor of theDaily Mail 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> by an executive from its Sunday 
sister title.

His move comes as part of a reshuffle of the top team around editor-in-chief 
Dacre, understood to underline the 67-year-old’s desire to remain at the helm 
of the newspaper for the foreseeable future.

Steafel, who hit the headlines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/oct/02/mail-miliband-row-newsnight> 
when he was forced to publicly defend the Mail’s attack on Ed Miliband’s father 
Ralph, is to become group managing editor and publisher of Mail Plus, a new 
role which gives him oversight of the newspaper’s tablet edition.

Related: Daily Mail editor received £88,000 in EU subsidies in 2014 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/30/daily-mail-editor-paul-dacre-received-88000-eu-subsidies-2014>

He is to be replaced as deputy by Gerard Greaves, the deputy of the Mail on 
Sunday’s editor Geordie Greig since 2012. Given a new title of senior deputy 
editor, the promotion for Greaves makes him the man now tipped as Dacre’s 
eventual successor.

Steafel, who has worked for the Mail for decades, has been described as a 
natural successor to the editor-in-chief and edited the paper almost every 
Monday and whenever Dacre is on holiday. First appointed joint deputy in 2005, 
Steafel was made sole number two four years later.

In an announcement to staff on Tuesday afternoon, Dacre said: “Jon Steafel 
recently approached me to say that, after 10 years as deputy editor, he wanted 
a change and was looking for new challenges within the company.

“I am sure you will all join me in thanking Jon for his brilliant and selfless 
work as deputy and will support him as he takes on his considerable new 
responsibilities.”

Mail Plus, he added, “has exciting growth potential”.

The statement went on to announce a raft of new roles without comment, with 
Greaves followed by Ted Verity and Paul Carter as joint deputy editors. The two 
men were appointed joint associate editors in 2009.

Other senior appointments include Ben Taylor as executive editor (news), Tobyn 
Andreae as executive editor (features) and Alex Bannister as assistant editor.

In an unprecedented move for the Mail, Steafel appeared on BBC’s Newsnight in 
2013 to defend the paper’s suggestion that Ralph Miliband “hated British 
values”. Although Steafel refused to apologise or retract the profile, a 
question from Alastair Campbell, the former Labour press chief, prompted him to 
say that using an image of Miliband’s grave “may well be an error of judgment”. 
He added that it had been removed from the online version of the newspaper 
after his intervention and never appeared in print.
