
Cooking, I think, is a lot like music: we use it to escape, we get it from our 
parents, and sooner or later we stop trying anything new. In my case, I cook to 
escape doing the washing up. If there is an afterlife, and it’s a bad one, I 
think it’s mainly unwashed crockery.

As for cooking itself, I learned that from my mum, who operated on the 
principle: “Give a child a fish and you shut him up for an evening, teach him 
how to cook a fish and you shut him up for a lifetime.”

At university, cooking for myself had two advantages. The first was that I 
didn’t have to eat in halls. The second was that giving people food is still 
the most effective way I’ve found of getting them to give you alcohol.

It was at university that I honed the five or six meals I still cook on a 
regular weeknight – simple things such as risotto, grilled fish or bolognese – 
and the further three to four meals – roasts, curries, stews – that I might 
prepare for guests.

But just as my taste in music is largely becalmed somewhere in 2013, my 
cooking has become increasingly dominated by a few old favourites. I live in 
fear that tinned tomatoes may one day vanish from the shops, but am safe in the 
knowledge that no-one who has eaten these dishes has ever died. Or, at least, 
not within a time frame that can be traced back to me.

I have strong feelings about eggs – they are an ingredient ... When I see a 
boiled egg, I see a cake that didn’t make it

I always mean to expand my range, but only in the same way I always mean to do 
my tax return promptly, learn another language, or go to the gym. What instead 
happens is that I buy cookery books, which stay unopened, and pin recipes to 
the fridge, which remain there until my partner recycles them.

So, when I was given the chance to cook a recipe from Delia’s Complete How to 
Cook every week, it felt like a dream come true. At last, I would broaden my 
horizons. I would unlock the mysteries of making chutneys and overcome my fear 
of cooking pork. My breads would be beguiling, my sauces sensational and I 
might even learn to make paté.

And who better to teach me than Delia? When I think of Delia, I think of rules 
and clear instructions. I like rules in cookery books, and distrust words like 
“a couple” or “bung” or other, unhelpfully vague instructions. With Delia at my 
side, I feel ready for anything. Bring it on.

Then they asked me to start by boiling an egg.

“Every single one of us has a personal preference as to precisely how we like 
our eggs cooked,” Delia writes in her introduction to boiling eggs, and, 
indeed, this is so. I have very strong feelings about eggs and how they should 
be cooked – namely, that eggs are an ingredient, not a food. When I look at a 
boiled egg, I see a cake that didn’t make it. But I persevere. Today, eggs, 
tomorrow, the world.

My partner, happily, is quite excited about the prospect of boiled eggs for 
dinner – which is either a sign that I don’t cook as well as I think, that she 
is easily pleased, or both.

Delia gives two ways of boiling eggs, both of which require the use of a 
timer, which briefly excites me, as I bought an egg-shaped timer a while ago, 
but I seldom use it.

There are far too many moving parts in the first method – bring it to a 
simmer, cook it for a minute, cast around wildly for the saucepan lid that my 
partner has helpfully walked into the kitchen and tidied away, and so on. The 
second is much more direct – chuck the eggs in cold water, bring it boil, and 
then cook to taste. Delia helpfully suggests times to achieve the desired 
result, and mine is exactly as I want it – the egg white firm, the yolk runny.

Good, but still a waste of something that would have been the beginning of a 
perfectly good cake.

 * Stephen Bush is a writer and columnist for the New Statesman. @stephenkb  
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb> 
 * You can buy Delia’s Complete How to Cook <http://www.deliaonline.com> (BBC 
Books, RRP £40) for £32from the Guardian Bookshop. 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/delia-s-complete-how-to-cook.html> 