
The Chamber is well used to extraordinary displays of boorishness during prime 
minister's questions buteven hardened MPs were taken aback by David Cameron's 
performance 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2011/apr/27/david-cameron-calm-down-dear> 
on Wednesday, when (to recap, in case you have somehow missed a moment that 
within minutes was swamping the Twittersphere and within an hour had spawned 
nearly 400 news stories) he was challenged by Angela Eagle, shadow chief 
secretary to the treasury.

It was not a particularly earth-shattering challenge – he had said former 
Labour MP Howard Stoate (whom he was enlisting in his increasingly ragged 
defence of Andrew Lansley's NHS reforms) had been defeated by a Tory at the 
last election; she was pointing out, in the vociferous way required when a 
roomful of supposed adults is shouting at each other like sleep-deprived 
six-year-olds, that Stoate had in fact retired, rather than been defeated, in 
order to return to his job as a GP. "Calm down, dear," said Cameron, failing 
only to pat her gently on the head as he said it. "Calm down. Calm down and 
listen to the doctor."

In terms of levels of offensiveness, where to start? The imputation that 
Eagle, being a woman, was just being hysterical, over-emotional? The further 
imputation that nothing she said was therefore worth listening to? The 
belittling "dear"? The arrogant superiority? The paternal order to listen not 
just to him, but to "the doctor", these men who know best?Frankly, he only 
failed to pat her gently on the head. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2011/apr/27/cameron-calm-down-dear-sexist-put-down>

"Calm down," he said yet again, in case anyone had missed it. They most 
definitely hadn't: even the Daily Telegraph, which could not resist anen passant
 dig at the "frighteningly feminist" Eagle, noted that: "The wind whistled 
around the Commons chamber in the seconds after he said it." There was some 
laughter: George Osborne, unsurprisingly, guffawed, but Nick Clegg, sitting to 
the prime minister's right, went completely, unsmilingly still, as though by 
doing so he could somehow will himself invisible, or at least somewhere else.

On the benches opposite there was fury, and immediate calls for him to 
apologise. "I am not going to apologise," replied Cameron. "You do need to calm 
down." Only intervention by the Speaker made him retreat to his seat.

The waves of comment started instantly, though they pushed in various 
directions. For some – including Downing street aides, it was just a joke — "a 
popular advert and a humorous remark [in danger of being] over-analysed." 
Michael Winner – whose catchphrase it became, after he repeated it ad nauseum 
in adverts for the insurance company Esure – was predictably tickled. "David 
Cameron's actually used this phrase before – he said it in theHouse of Commons 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> last year. I remember 
feeling pleased when I saw him say it at the time, and I'm pleased to hear him 
use it again now. It's just a harmless phrase I wrote for an advert 10 years 
ago, and it's entered into the national consciousness – I get people shouting 
it at me in the street or in restaurants, all the time, and I don't mind in the 
least. The Labour party are saying it's disrespectful to women, but what planet 
are they on? It's just a jolly statement, a bit of fun – and we need fun more 
than ever in these dour times. I really can't imagine why Harriet Harman, or 
anyone else, would object to it."

But many felt differently. "It was very patronising and I think he ought 
quickly to say he's sorry and move on," says Caroline Lucas, the Green MP who 
entered parliament for the first time (for herself and her party) a year ago. 
"But I think it tells you more about the culture of the House of Commons than 
aboutDavid Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, to be 
fair to him. If someone said that in any workplace people would be shocked, but 
there is a culture, particularly in the chamber, whereby people are pretty rude 
to one another, and there is an environment of sexism. I think it turns a lot 
of women off, and his comments were a step over the mark really. But I wouldn't 
pick him out more than other men."

What does it say about Cameron himself, though? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/the-womens-blog-with-jane-martinson/2011/apr/27/calm-down-dear-david-cameron>
 "I think you see far more about what he's actually like by looking at his 
policies, when you see how they're targeting the poorest, and women most of 
all. I'm not excusing him – but he's certainly not alone in that kind of 
attitude, unfortunately. But I think we should look at his policies."

"What does anyone expect from the man who is cutting Sure Start, playgrounds, 
child benefit, etc?" echoed a poster on Mumsnet, which was afire with 
commentary, ranging from "Storm, meet teacup. Calm down. Not everything is 
overt sexism designed to push women back into the kitchen," to less printable 
reactions. "When did he ever think women were important?"

Many others, however, were not shy about concluding that this was a definitive 
moment when his carefully cultivated persona of caring, sharing, socially 
up-to-date conservative was stripped away. Or, as Labour backbencher Chuka 
Umunna instantly tweeted: "The mask slips."

"David Cameron's contemptuous response to Angela Eagle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> MP at prime minister's 
questions today shows his patronising and outdated attitude to women," says 
Harriet Harman. "Women in Britain in the 21st century do not expect to be told 
to 'calm down dear' by their prime minister."

"He used the phrase on purpose to put her down," adds feminist campaigner 
Julie Bindel, "to make sure she knew he's got power over her. It's not an 
accident, and it's not the same at all as if a woman says it to a woman or man 
says it to a man. Cameron hates strong women, and Angela Eagle is a strong 
woman and a feminist who obviously doesn't suffer fools. She hasn't got to 
where she is today as an out lesbian without being strong – it really takes 
some guts. They always get horrific misogyny. This isn't the the first time 
it's happened to her but it's the first time inPMQs 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>.

"And Cameron is a very traditional man who has not absorbed feminism or its 
messages at all. The women in his cabinet [Lynne Featherstone and Theresa May, 
specifically] are there as a concession and as window dressing. Winner was only 
using a phrase that has been used for time immemorial. It's the clean version 
of 'all you need is a good fuck', or 'don't worry your little dykey head about 
this, it's for the big dicks to sort out' – that's what he's saying, in his 
oh-so-polite old Etonian way. It's total and utter misogyny."

But for some it betrays something else, too. It has been noted before, not 
least by Ed Miliband, who called it Cameron's "Flashman routine", that the 
prime minister can resort too easily to bullying, or cheap shots. "When he 
doesn't have an argument, he'll throw an insult."

And, like much bullying, it comes out of a kind of weakness. "It's awfully 
paternalistic, and politically incredibly stupid," says psychotherapist and 
writer Susie Orbach, "but what this portrays, or betrays, is that he's 
flustered, not her. You don't say that kind of thing unless you're flustered. 
He's trying to silence her, because he's got all shook up." Round one to 
Eagle, then?
