
Both C and I were trying to go to a party on a Tuesday night, which is a 
stupid thing to attempt, even though we were doing a staggered arrival (one of 
you turns up so that the couple takes on this sheen of punctuality: it doesn't 
work, by the way. The late one still looks late, or else it looks as if you had 
an argument on the tube, which, had we gone on the tube together, we most 
certainly would have done).

So, I was going to leave home first, while C did the bath stuff and waited for 
the babysitter, and I secretly, very strongly, suspect him of thinking this was 
the wrong way round, because he had been at work all day.* I had also been at 
work all day, but it is impossible to persuade anybody that you're working when 
you're either at lunch or you're in pyjamas (or some shapeless jersey 
equivalent) staring out of the window. This has always been true, it's nothing 
to do with babies, but it never mattered before. He could be credulous, or 
incredulous. I paid half the mortgage, didn't I? What else did he need, a note 
from my mum?

This is turning into one of those long and intricate whinges that lead the 
childless to wonder why anybody has children, but post-T, there is a silent 
territorial struggle over every block of five minutes. So I think, man, you 
think you're tired. You've just had 55 minutes on a bus. You didn't even have 
to drive it. You just had to sit there and not get into a fight. There's more 
relaxation right there than there is in a flotation tank. And he gets home and 
thinks**, how can you possibly be tired, you sit in elasticated trousers all 
day, looking at Facebook and laughing at your own jokes. And then we mask these 
true feelings by lavishing fun upon the child, and offering one another a hot 
drink, until the moment has passed and once again, a skirmish has been 
successfully avoided.

I think I'm going to go into industrial arbitration. Because I am brilliant at 
it.

A whole new strand of conflict is the one about bathing or changing or 
otherwise displeasing the young one. It's a funny business; say I'm changing T 
myself, and he starts crying, I can see immediately that he isn't upset, he's 
just acting the giddy goat, and I take no notice, and in a second, it's 
finished. When C is doing it, by some power of subjective hearing, it sounds 
louder, more genuine and distraught, and goes on about 10 times longer, so I'm 
upstairs thinking, "What on earth is going on, why can't he do it right (C, not 
T)? Is there a slug in his babygrow (T, not C)? Has he got meningitis?" etc 
etc, leading inexorably to this thought: "It would be much less stressful for 
me if I were doing this myself," which leads, of course, to this thought: "He 
is doing this deliberately badly (C, not T), to make me wish I had done it."***

Where were we? Oh yes, it is 6.38 on a Tuesday night, and there is a bath 
upstairs being executed deliberately badly, so I am very stressed, and I cannot 
decide what to wear in this condition, so I cannot put my makeup on, so when I 
actually step out of the house, it is 6.58, which is only seven minutes before 
C was going to leave anyway. I know what you're thinking. I am an absolute 
tool. There is no other word for me, apart from all those much better 
expletives.

So anyway, I arrive 10 minutes before C, and I'm bitching about him to these 
friends of ours, along the lines of, "Don't you find leaving the house a real 
crucible of conflict? I mean, don't you think it is actually impossible to do 
it without a fracas of some kind?" and she, the lady/mum, goes, "I know what 
you're doing. You're trying to steal one of our arguments for your column."

"Well, otherwise it is just us. This has to be a universal. Otherwise it is 
just one spiky woman giving her boyfriend a hard time."

"That is between you and your conscience," said this woman, who will never 
appear in this column again, which is why I haven't even given her her own 
initial. It is not just me. I know that, I know it for a fact.

* There is no evidence for this. ** There is substantial evidence for this, 
but none of it in words, unfortunately. *** I naturally keep all these 
unreasonable thoughts to myself. Doh!
