
New York's highest court on Tuesday will consider whether to overturn 
convictions in the Internet impersonation case of a man who argues that mocking 
scholars in an academic debate about the Dead Sea Scrolls was protected by the 
first amendment.

Raphael Golb, an attorney and writer, was convicted of identity theft and 
other charges for disguising his identity in email messages and blog posts from 
2006 to 2009 to discredit detractors of his father, a University of Chicago 
professor, in a dispute over the scrolls' origins. The more than 2,000-year-old 
documents, found in the 1940s in what is now Israel, contain the earliest known 
versions of portions of the Hebrew Bible.

Many scholars, including New York University Judaic studies chairman Lawrence 
Schiffman, say the texts were assembled by a sect known as the Essenes. Others 
– including Norman Golb, a University of Chicago historian and Golb's father – 
believe the writings were the work of a range of Jewish groups and communities, 
gathered from libraries in Jerusalem and hidden in caves near Qumran to protect 
them during a Roman invasion in about 70 AD.

Golb's lawyer argues that the trial judge's jury instructions failed to 
protect his client's first amendment rights and led to his convictions 
"precisely because his online impersonations called attention to, condemned and 
mocked alleged wrongdoing on the part of the Scroll monopolists and exhibitors."

A mid-level court threw out one conviction but affirmed 29 others, concluding 
the intended harm to scholars fell within the definition of injury and wasn't 
protected by free speech. Golb was sentenced to six months in jail and five 
years' probation, but has remained free on bail during appeals. Other 
convictions included criminal impersonation, aggravated harassment, forgery and 
unauthorized use of a computer.

In their brief to the Court of Appeals, Manhattan prosecutors cited Golb's 
"relentless impersonation and harassment," sending emails under aliases to 
museum administrators, academics and reporters, and eventually impersonating 
his father's critics online. He used a New York University computer to create 
an email account in Schiffman's name to send alleged confessions by Schiffman 
of plagiarizing Professor Norman Golb's work years earlier.

Golb, a literature scholar and real estate lawyer with a Harvard PhD and an 
NYU law degree, acknowledged during his trial that he wrote the messages. But, 
he said he never intended for anyone to believe Schiffman actually sent them, 
calling them "satire, irony, parody."

A court of appeals ruling is expected next month.
