
Floating on the Thames just downstream from Tower Bridge are the most 
extraordinary gardens, yet thanks to their illustrious neighbour they're 
largely unnoticed. The barge gardens at Downings Road moorings were created 
nine years ago on a series of modified Thames lighters, each one converted into 
apartments and studios, and with serious roof gardens. Planted in huge, metal 
trays about 40cm deep, each has a discernible character. The planting runs 
mostly on either side of central sleeper paths, with shrubs the dominant forms, 
among them 2m-tall hebes, cordylines and escallonias, with yellow-leaved 
Robinia 'Frisia' lending extra height and structure. Even so, most taller 
plants never reach full size because the roots are unnaturally restricted in 
the trays.

Elaine Hughes, resident and recent custodian of the gardens, created the 
seventh, and latest, garden. "Each contains 50% topsoil and 50% manure, so it's 
quite rich," she says. Shrubs tend to grow too fast and get congested, so she 
went for swathes of Euphorbia amygdaloides var robbiae and lots of ferns in a 
style she calls "broadly woodland", complemented by apple trees and low box.

It's only when the wake from a passing boat hits the barge that you remember 
all this is floating on a river in one of the most dynamic cities in the world.

· During droughts, water is pumped straight from the Thames, yet the salty, 
tidal water has no obvious detrimental effects.

· The drainage on the barges is almost too good, so they need a daily soaking 
in summer. The dry soil means that trees, including these false acacias, do not 
reach their full potential.

· Typical seaside and roof-garden planting is well adapted to the desiccating 
winds on the open Thames, and includes waxy, silver-leaved and evergreen plants 
such as Stipa tenuissima and lavender.

· The lack of usual garden predators has led to a plague of snails. Walking on 
the paths at night can be a crunchy experience but a mass snail genocide by 
torch-wielding residents has sent many to a watery grave.

· The gardens attract plenty of waterfowl. However, despite the introduction 
of stacks of rotting logs to attract bugs, this remains something of an 
unbalanced ecosystem, because of its isolated island nature.
