
Job: chairman, Telegraph Media Group
Age: 52
Industry: publishing
Staff: 1,000
New entry

No, it is not a clerical error. For the first time since they bought the 
Telegraph titles in 2004, Sir David and Sir Frederick Barclay miss out on the 
MediaGuardian 100, replaced by Telegraph Media Group chairman (and Sir David's 
son),Aidan Barclay <http://www.theguardian.com/media/aidanbarclay>.

"Sir David and Sir Frederick might own the Telegraph group but Aidan is the 
man who runs it - he is the real power in the land," said our panel.
 Aidan Barclay. Photograph: Richard Young/Rex Features  Given their aversion 
to the spotlight, the billionaire Barclay brothers may be the first media types 
delighted not to be included. Or possibly not. Note to the Barclays' lawyers - 
we're not saying either way.
But back to Aidan. The Telegraph Media Group chairman is in day-to-day charge 
of the brothers' publishing interests and discusses the two Telegraph titles 
with the daily and Sunday paper editor-in-chief, Will Lewis, on a weekly basis.

Lewis, who described Aidan Barclay as his "proprietor", said the discussions 
were about strategy and never about editorial content.

However, former Sunday Telegraph editor Dominic Lawson claimed that Aidan 
Barclay had once asked him not to run a story about David Blunkett and the 
"paternity of various children than he may or may not have fathered". The story 
eventually ran anyway, but Lewis said such a situation had never occurred to 
him.

Whatever the truth, Aidan Barclay - to whom Telegraph group chief executive 
Murdoch MacLennan reports - has overseen a transformation of the Telegraph 
group since the Barclays bought the papers for £655m four years ago.

During that time there has been a wholesale axing of the Telegraph old guard 
and a headlong rush to embrace the digital era. But perhaps the most telling 
statistic is the number of editors there have been on the two papers in that 
time - seven.

They were Martin Newland, John Bryant and (current incumbent and 
editor-in-chief) Will Lewis on the daily paper; and Dominic Lawson, Sarah 
Sands, Patience Wheatcroft and now Ian MacGregor on the Sunday title. The 
Barclays' era has been many things, but consistent is not necessarily one of 
them.

Aidan Barclay's low profile matches that of his father and uncle. Unlike many 
newspaper executives he refused to appear before the House of Lords 
communications committee to help it with its investigation into media 
ownership. Barclay said it would not be in the "commercial interests" of the 
Telegraph group to share his views or strategy with its competitors.

The committee chairman, Lord Fowler, was distinctly unimpressed. "I don't 
think total freedom of the press means you cannot answer some questions about 
how the newspaper is run," he said. The committee had wanted to question him 
over the wildly differing accounts it had heard about the Barclays' management 
style."

Barclay also oversees the Spectator, edited by another new entry on this 
year's list, Matthew d'Ancona.

Before taking control of the Telegraph group he was chairman of the Barclays' 
Press Holdings Group, and in 2000 made an abortive £75m bid for the Express 
group, then owned by Lord Hollick.

· To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk 
<mailto:editor@mediaguardian.co.uk> or phone 020 7239 9857. For all other 
inquiries please call the main Guardian switchboard on 020 7278 2332.

· If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
