
Jeremy Corbyn <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> still speaks 
about it wistfully – a rally in Glasgow’s Old Fruitmarket that turned into one 
of the most emotional moments of his leadership campaign. At the end of his 
speech, in front of a crowd of 1,000, he clapped and – unlike in St Paul’s – 
sang along to the Spanish civil war anthem Bandiera Rossa.


It was a night of nostalgia for the days when the city was a socialist 
heartland, dominated by Labour and the unions. But the night was about more 
than just nostalgia. Corbyn left a sense of hope among at least some in the 
hall that maybe Labour’s decline inScotland 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> might not be terminal after all. With 
Corbyn in charge, it would be hard for the Scottish National party to make 
jibes about Labour being Red Tories.

His campaign and overwhelming election to the leadership have been accompanied 
by an influx of new and returning members to the party in Scotland as 
elsewhere, and some former supporters who defected to the SNP are returning.

Related: Corbynmania storms Scotland – part revivalist fervour, part Spinal Tap
 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/15/jeremy-corbyn-campaign-scotland-corbynmania>

My brother John, aged 60, is among them. His political journey is reflected by 
many others in Scotland.

A Labour supporter most of his life, having joined the party when he was 16, 
he voted against independence last year but then voted SNP for the first time 
in May, dismissingLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> as too 
centrist. A few months ago, he said he was in favour of independence.

And now? He said he intended to return to Labour as a result of Corbyn 
becoming leader and would vote Labour in the Scottish parliament election in 
May. “The problem I have had with Labour for a while is that it went too much 
to the right and it was hard to differentiate them from the Tories. They told 
voters what they wanted to hear, not what they think. Corbyn is not afraid to 
put up a fight.”

But Corbyn has not resulted in a wholehearted change. Labour’s new leader has 
made him hesitate about a vote for independence – but only a little. “Corbyn 
has made me think a bit about it. I would still maybe vote for independence, 
but I have come back a bit.”

This is Labour’s headache in Scotland. One that the SNP leader, Nicola Sturgeon
 <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, and the former leader 
Alex Salmond are already exploiting. My brother, like many others on the left 
in Scotland, fears one Conservative government after another being voted in by 
England. They see the antidote to this as Scotland becoming independent. If 
Labour under Corbyn was to drop in the polls and a Labour government in 2020 
appeared unlikely, the SNP would be among the main beneficiaries.

John Curtice, professor of politics at Strathclyde University, and one of the 
few pollsters to emerge from the general election with his credibility intact – 
he conducted the general election exit poll – also identified this Labour 
vulnerability as the continuing fallout from the referendum. About 35% of 
Labour voters in Scotland in 2010 had voted yes to independence. Virtually all 
of them had gone on to vote for the SNP in May.

“If Corbyn was able to persuade them Labour is to the left, he might persuade 
them back but he would have to persuade them they do not need independence.”

There have been 25 opinion polls since the referendum: 17 put the no 
supporters ahead, seven the yes, and one was tied. The average was yes 48% and 
52% no, a 3% rise in support for independence.

Another problem is the Scottish Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/kezia-dugdale>, who is to the right of 
Corbyn and is relatively inexperienced. During the leadership campaign she was 
dismissive of him, saying that if he won the party would be left carping on the 
sidelines, though she has since changed her position.

An old friend from Glasgow <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> University 
days, Hugh Henry, a Labour member of the Scottish parliament, sees Corbyn as 
offering Labour “a window of opportunity”. Henry, well to the left in his 
younger days when he was a member of Militant but went on to become a Scottish 
government minister, said: “The election of Jeremy Corbyn as leader of the UK 
Labour party has certainly given some of those who have travelled from Labour 
to the SNP cause to think again.

Related: Kezia Dugdale: Corbyn win could leave Labour 'carping on sidelines' 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/02/kezia-dugdale-corbyn-win-leave-labour-carping-sidelines-years>

“The test for Scottish Labour will be in whether we can offer something 
sufficiently in tune with the thinking of ordinary Scots where they will see a 
difference in their lives and living standards.”

Another old friend, Iain Macwhirter, a journalist, broadcaster and author of 
Disunited Kingdom about the referendum and the forthcoming Tsunami: Scotland’s 
Democratic Revolution about the SNP’s landslide in May, said: “Corbyn is the 
huge black swan that has swum into the constitutional debate.

“SNP can no longer claim to be the sole inheritors of the pre-Tony Blair 
social democratic party. Now it has a rival,” he said.

But he cautioned that the SNP remained in a powerful position, with a huge 
membership and Sturgeon enjoying high levels of support.

Former teacher and leftwinger John Henry, from Glasgow, said Corbyn might woo 
him back. “If there is one man who could restore Labour in Scotland, it is one 
who would not sing God Save the Queen,” he said.

Labour looked dead and buried in Scotland. A little hope has emerged from an 
unexpected source in the shape of Corbyn. He said he would spend one day a 
month in Scotland, but it might turn out to be too little and too late.

• This article was amended on 22 September 2015. An earlier version referred 
to Bandiera Rossa as an “Italian Communist” anthem. What the author originally 
wrote was that the song was a Spanish civil war anthem, but during the editing 
process the online version was changed to say “Italian communist anthem”. To 
clarify: while the song is in Italian and emerged from the labour movement in 
Italy in the early 1900s, it became famous as an anthem in the Spanish civil 
war, when it was sung by Italian members of the International Brigades.

