
No, I’m not a hipsterphobe, so OK, what if I am, it’s time we took to the 
streets, I’m proud to hate hipsters. If you can’t see what people like those 
bastards with their stupid beards and mad hair are doing to real people with no 
beards and proper hair in areas where they’ve been quite happy with a Spar for 
generations, sorry, you’re part of the problem.

Yeah, I did see the cafe covered in paint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/27/shoreditch-cereal-cafe-targeted-by-anti-gentrification-protesters>
. What do you want me to do, cry, because a pair of privileged, 
diabetes-inducing incomers got so much publicity for having to clean up spilled 
Sugar Puffs that they’ve practically been canonised? Whose fault is that? 
Typical Tory scum press, they’re part of the problem – I’m not the one writing 
about crap hipster cafes when there are steelworkers losing their jobs.

Do you know how much they charge for a bowl of their putrid cereal – £4.50! Do 
you know how many cigarettes you can buy for that? Well, OK, but you get my 
point, there are people starving and a pair of hairy munts think they can make 
a living serving overpriced baby food instead of setting up a charity like a 
normal person. It makes me sick, and it’s rammed now. I’d trash it again 
tomorrow if we weren’t doing that craft beer place in Clapton – much-loved 
pawnbroker, that used to be. You should see the guy who runs it now: bearded 
ginger clown with his pathetic posho’s dog, French bloody bulldogs. What’s 
wrong with a decent British rottweiler? Train it to bite hipsters, Tory toff 
scum. Eleven o’clock at Starbucks, if you want to come – big street party, plus 
crowdfunding for the acrobats on Indiegogo.

Target the banks? What, with their security? No, target somewhere you can 
properly scare people. You should’ve seen their faces, all the little Tristrams 
wetting themselves, mint. There’s loads on Instagram if you want a look. What’s 
wrong with that? If you don’t like direct action, don’t set up some moronic 
shop in the middle of a deprived area and generally take the gentrifying piss, 
or, if you do, at least get your hair cut and make it a William Hill.
