
Why and how did you become an entrepreneur?

I should have ended up working for an investment bank. I was fortunate to have 
a good education, with two degrees, one in commerce and one in law, and I 
qualified as a chartered accountant. But it’s been a phenomenal journey of ups 
and downs, achievements and failings and mistakes.

I realised that what appealed to me about being an entrepreneur was the 
freedom to be in control of my own destiny and the opportunities where the sky 
is the limit.

Then I had an idea that came from being dissatisfied as a consumer with fizzy, 
bland, bloating lagers. I loved real ale but found that I couldn’t drink it 
with food. I found the ale delicious and smooth on its own but I used to visit 
Indian restaurants a lot and I found it too heavy and bitter to accompany the 
food. I wanted to produce a beer that had the smoothness of an ale and the 
refreshment of a lager.

What was your biggest challenge starting Cobra?

In the early days, raising finance was the biggest challenge. I had £20,000 of 
student debt to pay off so we had to raise everything. When we started the 
business in 1989, we had a bank overdraft and then used a variety of different 
forms of finance, including trade finance. We didn’t have things like 
crowdsourcing in those days. We used Victorian instruments like bills of 
exchange and convertible preference shares.

Cobra was in crisis after the recession. How did it survive? Do you have any 
advice for businesses in a crisis?

I nearly lost my business three times; the last and I hope the final time was 
2008/09. We had received financing from a large strategic investor who pulled 
out two months before Lehman Brothers went bust. When we went into the 
financial crisis we were growing very rapidly and that growth had a lot of 
value. After the financial crisis, growth didn’t seem to have any value – cash 
became not just king but emperor. We had too much debt. I didn’t see the 
financial crisis coming. I had hired some wrong people. I have to take 
responsibility for that.

Good judgment comes from experience and experience comes from bad judgment. 
There is no shortcut sometimes to making the mistakes and, hopefully, learning 
from them.

But what I did find was that there were three factors that saw me through each 
of those crises. The first was the brand. Cobra sales didn’t drop once 
throughout those difficult times. The second was having a strong team and 
family support. I met my wife a year after I started Cobra and she has 
supported me through the whole journey. My director of sales has been with me 
for 23 years and without him by my side I wouldn’t have got through. The third 
is having the right values – integrity every single time.

What are the main opportunities for UK businesses abroad?

UK businesses have phenomenal opportunities abroad. Every business now, 
however small, has to start thinking global from day one. There are enormous 
opportunities for businesses to partner with Indian companies providing 
professional services – manufacturing, for example, like I did in the country. 
The big accounting firms are already partnered with Indian accounting firms. 
The consumer market there is only going to increase.

What would an exit from the EU mean for small businesses? Should we stay or 
should we go?

I am an openly declared eurosceptic. There is a lot about the EU that I really 
do not like – the regulations for example and the euro has been a disaster. Now 
with the migration crisis and the terrorism threat, Schengen needs to reform. 
Border checks need to be reintroduced across Europe.

But the trading zone has been excellent and, on balance, I do think it is 
worth staying in because I think the alternative is very risky. A lot of 
countries like India see the UK as the gateway to Europe. We would lose that 
perception of being part of this huge common market. We’d have to renegotiate 
trade deals.

But, on the other hand, we’d have the opportunity to negotiate our own trade 
agreements. To think we can leave the EU and negotiate on the same terms that 
we have now is not realistic. We’d still have to contribute – maybe not £8bn 
net a year, perhaps £4bn or £5bn a year. The safer bet is to be part of Europe 
and continue to try and reform it from within.

Also the peace we have in Europe has been brought about not just by Nato but 
by the European Union. And it’s worth paying £8bn a year just for that.

You’ve been chancellor of the University of Birmingham, president of the UK 
Council for International Student Affairs and chair of the advisory board of 
the Cambridge Judge Business School. Why have you taken on these posts and what 
do you think is the role of education in creating the next wave of 
entrepreneurs?

When I started my business, for the first eight years I was totally focused on 
it with no time for anything else. Then I attended Cranfield School of 
Management. That changed my life. It engaged me in lifelong learning. I 
realised the value of it and when I was out of my business I realised how much 
I learned just from my peer group of other entrepreneurs.

I then did a course at London Business School and at Harvard Business School. 
It got me engaged in education and one thing led to another. I’ve always been 
passionate about higher education and I started lecturing quite a lot. Teaching 
students is a great privilege. Every time I give a lecture I learn from the 
class.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
