
What does my garden say about me?

“I’ve always enjoyed being outdoors; fresh air is a great tonic. I don’t feel 
like I’m retired – I’m busy all the time. I like having the time to do what I 
want to at last.”

What this garden says about Mary

What a lovely garden. Sunlit and thriving, it looks almost magical; an 
enchanted woodland in a fairy tale. And how far it is from the suburban gardens 
of English tradition. No manicured lawn, no rose bushes in rows, no attempts at 
hedge topiary. Not even any tomato frames. This is not a garden designed to win 
rosettes at summer fayres. It is about nature, growing.

Urban gardens – and this is one – are for nurturing vegetables and herbs, 
sometimes meadow flowers. Urbanites don’t yearn for the burbs, but they can get 
misty over the countryside, about getting in touch with the earth and the sky, 
about feeding themselves from their own efforts rather than nipping to the 
supermarket. City gardeners don’t want too much neatness: they are freestyle 
and fashionable, and, though it might not seem it at first glance, this is a 
fashionable garden. It’s also vaguely left-wing.Gardens 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardens> like this aren’t attached to 
a property: they’re not private, they’re communal. A bit like parks, designed 
for everyone who would like some greenery in their building-locked lives.

And in the middle of this garden, here is Mary. Dressed in Brasher-style 
waterproof walking boots, hard-wearing jeans, lightweight but warm jacket, plus 
a T-shirt that leaves you in no doubt of her priorities. Accessories: 
sunglasses and a rake. She means business.

Mary looks directly into the camera. She seems suspicious of its attention, 
rather impatient. Interestingly, she doesn’t look a particular age. She could 
be in her 40s, 50s, 60s… You can’t tell, because she’s busy and she looks you 
straight in the eye and she’d rather be doing something constructive. I imagine 
that if you joined Mary in her work, digging and weeding and planting, sorting 
things out side by side, you would have some proper conversations. I would 
enjoy that. Mary and her garden look like fun to me.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
