
It is snowing, and half of one of my teeth has fallen out. I don't know which 
I am more unhappy about but decide the former as I have to go and meet Tilly, 
who is 12, from a friend's house four miles away. Her friend's family are going 
out and I need to be there pretty much now. But I am scared of driving in the 
snow and fear that our automatic car (chosen so that I could turn around and 
shout at the children without being interrupted by changing gear) will slide 
all over the place. Worse I have to take baby Flora with me as the other option 
– leaving her with my oldest daughter, Maddy – seems risky as I don't know how 
long I will be. But I know I'll need back up.

"Would you like to come with me and pick up Tilly?" I ask Maddy, who I know 
would not like to come with me to pick up Tilly and is probably still in her 
pyjamas. There is silence from upstairs.

I repeat the request, more loudly and honestly. "Please come with me because I 
don't want to have take Flora out of the car," I say.

There is more silence. I am in a hurry (the snow will turn the half an hour 
journey into one much longer) but I don't want to risk having a row.

Maddy thumps down the stairs, ungraciously. My anxiety at driving into what 
looks like oblivion outside makes me angry.

"OK, so don't come," I say. "Why should I expect you to help me? You never 
help around the house. I never made you help – I'm a bad mother."

"Look, I just had to get ready that's all," says Maddy, calmly. "I helped look 
after Flora last night. I empty the dishwasher. What more do you want from me? 
A kidney?"

We step out into the snow storm. Flora quickly becomes a little snow ball – 
snow settles on her eyelashes and mouth and she licks her lips and squeals with 
delight. I am less ecstatic.

"I can't do this," I say. "We'll phone Tilly and say she has to get the bus 
home."

"You freak out so easily," says Maddy, unsympathetically. "If you go slowly, 
you'll be fine."

So we do go slowly. About 10 miles per hour, following a long procession of 
equally slow moving cars, which makes me feel comforted although I worry Flora 
may start to get fractious.

"Have you got the baby bag?" I ask Maddy, and rather dangerously swivel round 
to feel for the precious rucksack.

It isn't there. I feel panic rising. Flora shouldn't go anywhere without her 
baby bag. The baby bag is often heavier than the baby. And here we are, driving 
inch by inch in a blizzard with a baby and no baby bag. I feel an irrational 
anger at Tilly for having gone somewhere. For making me a careless mother.

"Flora's gone to sleep," says Maddy. "She'll be fine without the bag."

Just before we get to Tilly's friend's house, it stops snowing. Tilly is 
oblivious to the trauma involved in picking her up.

"Look, S gave me some chocolates," she says cheerfully.

"That's good because we haven't got the baby bag, and if Flora starts 
screaming we may need to give her some," I say.

Tilly looks appalled.

"Well, I won't want any because my new year's resolution is to eat healthily 
and get fit," says Maddy.

"Mine is to stop playing with my ears," says Tilly, who is forever twiddling 
her earrings.

I stick my tongue into my broken tooth and feel terribly old and sorry for 
myself. "Mine is to get my tooth sorted out," I say.

"Nah," say the girls, almost in unison. "You need to start wearing makeup," 
they say. "That should be your new year's resolution."
