
Acer palmatum and even the oaks have had their branches continuously pruned to 
keep them small. The technique is not strictly the same as for bonsai, because 
the roots have not been pruned The only way to keep grass very short on village 
greens, cricket pitch and, if you're that way inclined, the garden is to mow it 
often with a cylinder mower - at least weekly, if not more Chamaecyparis obtusa 
'Nana Aurea' is often planted as a dwarf shrub (thuja and chamaecyparis are the 
best species for tightly clipping). If left unclipped, it would eventually 
reach 2m

Conifers respond well to clipping, but only if it's done little and often. If 
you cut past the green foliage into the brown wood, they will not grow back

At first sight, Bekonscot Model Village seems just a wonderland for kids and a 
certain type of adult. So what, you may well ask, is this scaled-down version 
of 30s life doing in the gardening pages?

The horticultural interest at this one-and-a-half-acre tourist attraction is 
what lies between the six model villages: a miniature landscape of farms, 
fields, woods, lakes and rolling hills planted with more than 3,000 shrubs and 
trees. Many of the plants are what we know as dwarf conifers, but the name is 
misleading because, if they'd been left to their own devices, most would be 
full-sized trees by now. Instead, they have been clipped and trimmed 
religiously since the village was built in 1929, while Japanese elms, Zelkova 
serrata and Japanese maples have been "bonsaied" and now have shapely trunks 
and elegant forms.

There are, then, lessons and inspiration to be had here for conventional 
gardeners who have limited space to work with. One shining example is the 
miniature copy of Hampton Court maze, on which Lonicera nitida 'Baggesons Gold' 
has been used for the hedging. This is trimmed a number of times a year to keep 
it truly tiny, and shows how it would clearly make a superb substitute for 
dwarf box hedging. (Open all year, 01494 672919;bekonscot.com 
<http://www.bekonscot.com>).
