
I follow Jane Grigson’s advice when I buy a cauliflower: “If the cauliflower 
looks back at you with a vigorous air, buy it; if it looks in need a good 
night’s sleep, leave it where it is.” I left quite a few caulifowers exactly 
where they were this morning at Testaccio market, weary and a bit blotchy I 
thought – which was rich coming from me today. Then I did find a vigorous one, 
with unblemished, creamy white whorls, cupped in a fringe of leaves, and 
brought it home.

Rather confusingly, Romans sometimes call winter cauliflower broccolo. Not my 
fruttivendolo Gianluca, though – he calls it cavolo, which usually means 
cabbage, but is also an abbreviation ofcavolfiore, which literally means 
“cabbage flower”. I was faced with another level of misunderstanding in my 
partner’s hometown of Gela in south-east Sicily, an area in which cauliflowers 
– introduced by the Arabs after the fall of the Roman empire – flourish 
magnificently. They vary in size from a handful to a great armful, with colours 
from creamy white to blushing pink, to bishop purple to lime green, and are 
calledvrouccoli, broccolo bianco, broccolo-cavolo, and cavolfiore. From October 
to March cauliflowers and other brassicas quite literally cover Gela, as the 
once-central market is now dispersed somewhat lawlessly all over the city, 
playing out on corners, doorways, from the basements of people’s homes, the 
backs of trucks, cars, three-wheeled ape vans ...

Related: The 10 best cauliflower recipes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/06/10-best-cauliflower-recipes>

Faced with such cauliflower abundance it is unsurprising that the Sicilians 
have found such good ways to cook them. I particularly like a recipe in which 
cauliflower is boiled and then recooked with onions, anchovies, pine nuts, 
raisins, possibly saffron, and enough pasta cooking water to create a distinct 
delicious sauce to be mixed with pasta, which is then topped with a great 
shower of toasted breadcrumbs. My Sicilian family almost always has a bowl of 
toasted breadcrumbs on the table to sprinkle on whatever. Obviously I like 
cauliflower battered or breadcrumbed then fried until golden; pickled until 
lip-puckeringly sharp and crisp; and also drowned and braised in red wine with 
cheese (which might sound curious – which it is – but it’s also delicious – 
although you might need a rest after eating a large portion of it. Another 
favourite is cauliflower simmered in tomato sauce with whatever happens to be 
around.

Which brings us today’s recipe. It is inspired by dishes I have eaten in 
Sicily, but is my invention. That said, I’m sure it is not original. 
Cauliflower boiled in salted water (it should taste like the Mediterranean), 
then tossed in the sauce for a pasta known asalla puttanesca. There are several 
stories to why this happy combination of ingredients is calledputtanesca, or 
“whore’s style”. One story is that the owner of a brothel in the Spanish 
quarter of Naples would make this simple and delicious sauce with spaghetti for 
his girls and clients between appointments. A nice flourish to the story is 
that the colours of the sauce (the red of the tomatoes, the violet of the 
olive, the green of the capers, the burgundy of the peperoncino) mirrored the 
eye-catching colours of the clothes and undergarments the girls wore. I also 
like the story about a restaurant owner on the island of Ischia called Sandro 
Petti. The story goes that, faced with a group of hungry friends as he was 
closing one night, he shrugged and said he had nothing, and they raised their 
hands and said “mamma mia!” (obviously); “Abbiamo fame – facci una puttanata 
qualsiasi!” (“We are hungry – make us any type of garbage!”). Used like this, 
puttanata is a noun meaning something that’s “rubbish”, or worthless. Petti 
only had tomatoes, capers, olives and anchovies to hand, so he used them to 
make this sauce for spaghetti, which clearly went down well, as it was soon on 
his menu as spaghetti alla puttanesca.

You can of course nod to tradition and use the sauce below with spaghetti. I 
am suggesting you use it with cauliflower, and that you leave the florets 
sitting in the sauce for a few hours so they have time to do what they do so 
well – absorb flavours. After a few hours the florets will have had a complete 
personality change; a small rebellion in fact: from timid and sweet, to loud, 
salty and rather punchy. Of course with such opinionated ingredients, exact 
amounts are going to be personal. Use this recipe as loose guidelines, not a 
set of rules; you can experiment. If you find capers overwhelming, add less or 
leave them out. How salty are your olives? How hot is your chilli? You know 
better than me. Knowing how well lamb, anchovies and capers get on, we had this 
last night with little chops cookedalla scottaditto, which means “burn your 
fingers” – a clue as to how and when you should eat them. Soft-boiled eggs are 
also nice with cauliflower cooked this way, as is poached white fish. I bet a 
handful of toasted breadcrumbs would be good on top of this, too.

Cauliflower with tomatoes, anchovies, olives and capers

Serves 4
1 medium-size cauliflower
1 garlic clove
1 small dried chilli
5 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
6 anchovy fillets packed in oil, drained
1 heaped tbsp salt-packed capers
100g pitted black olives (ideally taggiasca or gaeta)
6 ripe tomatoes, peeled and roughly chopped, or 400g tinned tomatoes in juice
A small handful of chopped flat-leaf parsley

1 Pull away the tough outer leaves of the cauliflower, saving any pale tender 
ones. Cut the stalk from the cauliflower and divide the head into small 
florets. Cook the florets in well-salted, fast boiling water until tender, 
adding the leaves in the last few minutes of cooking, then drain.


2 Peel and finely chop the garlic along with the chilli. Warm the olive oil in 
a deep frying pan over a low heat and then add the garlic, chilli and 
anchovies, and while they sizzle gently, press the anchovies with the back of a 
wooden spoon so they disintegrate into the oil.

3 Rinse the capers and chop them, then add them to the pan along with the 
olives and tomatoes. Stir and cook over a medium-low heat for 15 minutes, 
breaking up the tomatoes with the back of the wooden spoon. Taste and add salt 
if necessary, also a little sugar if you think the sauce is too acidic.

4 Add the cauliflower and stir so each floret is well-coated with sauce. If 
you can, leave the dish to sit for at least an hour, and up to a day. When 
ready to eat, reheat gently, turning the florets in the sauce. Just before 
serving, finish with a handful of chopped parsley.

•This article has been amended to include in the method the pitted black 
olives listed in the ingredients.
