
What does this classic car say about me?

“I love the aesthetics of old cars and their timelessness. But I would never 
dress up and go to Goodwood festival – my wife would probably divorce me.”

And what it really says

Classic cars are a very expensive habit. They are an extra to your life, a 
beautiful, wayward, frustrating extra that brings sporadic joy and much 
wallet-emptying palaver. Still, despite all that, there is a lovely elemental 
side to classic cars. When you drive them you do a lot of the work yourself. 
You’re physically connected to a classic car in a way you’re not with a modern 
car. Classic cars feel alive.

Many people like the idea of classic cars – who wouldn’t want a motor as 
beautiful as Jeremy’s MG? – but they can’t face what owning one entails. You 
need a watertight garage (they sprout rust like eczema). You need a reliable 
car mechanic (the spark plugs stop working, the radiator leaks, the engine 
floods as soon as you turn the key, the big end goes BANG). You need the 
eyesight of a hawk (small mirrors) and the arms of Popeye (no power-assisted 
steering) just to get it out of the driveway. Oh, and you need a warm coat. The 
wind whistles through every which where.

Do I sound bitter? I’ve owned a couple of classic cars in my time. I loved 
them, but they broke my heart. Owners of classic cars have to be practically 
minded and a sucker for beauty. It’s no surprise that Jeremy is a photographer. 
You have to get everything practical in place – the mechanics, the maintenance, 
the location, the insurance, all the gear and paperwork – before you can get 
your elusive beauty to show off its gorgeous lines. You have to charm it into 
being wonderful and then keep it there through appropriate technology. 
Photographers know how to manage all this. It’s what they do for a living. And 
they do it all knowing that the perfect moment will go by in a flash – and they 
will have caught it.

If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
