
Why do tall women wear high heels?

PM, Lord’s Cricket Ground

Why does any woman wear high heels? As regular readers of this column will 
know, I find the enduring existence of high heels both a frustrating mystery 
and a testament to the triumph of women’s neuroses over their mobility. I have 
been told that some women find wearing high heels easy. And that’s great! GOOD 
FOR THEM. But I bet they’d find walking in flat shoes a heck of a lot easier. I 
once interviewed a celebrity who told me she “couldn’t think in flats”, leading 
me to wonder if maybe the problem was she couldn’t think at all. See? Not only 
can I think in flats, I can be a right bitch in them, too.

But your question is interesting, PM, because it reveals a common male 
misunderstanding about high heels (and rest assured, nervy Guardian readers, I 
am not making any assumptions about gender – I know PM is male because he asked 
me this question in person, at Lord’s, while I was watching a cricket match, 
something else I can do in flats.) You, understandably, think women wear high 
heels to be taller, but you are sorely underestimating the mental minefield 
that it is to be a woman.

Oh, I know, men, I know: things are ever so complicated for the modern male 
these days. Should you hold a door for a woman or not? (Yes.) Should you offer 
your seat on the train to a pregnant woman or not? (Yes.) Should you wear 
aftershave or not? (No.) Is it OK to chat up women or does that now count as 
sexual harassment? (Depends how harass-y your chat is.) Honestly, it’s a marvel 
that you cope with this veritable minefield of dilemmas!

But occasionally a question will pop through my postbox – or, in this case, be 
posed to me on the stands at a cricket ground – that will remind me how simple 
the world is when viewed through the average man’s eyes, not because the men 
themselves are simple, but because they are not weighed down with the amount of 
bullshit women are.

Now, at the risk of stooping to bad-chicklit level of gender stereotyping, 
when I imagine a man’s perspective of the world, I picture a sunny, 
two-dimensional landscape, sort of like level one of Super Mario Bros (and yes, 
I am referencing Super Mario Bros for the second week in a row in this column). 
A land, you see, where clothing choices are made by what fits and what doesn’t, 
where food decisions are made by whether you’re hungry or not. A woman’s 
perspective of the world, however, is like when your TV aerial has been knocked 
out by the wind and the picture is an angry, staticky mess, where everything 
you choose – what to wear, what to eat, whether to eat – is freighted with a 
million twinges of self-loathing and soundtracked by the furious voices of rage 
that live in almost every woman’s head: “You’re too fat to eat that doughnut!” 
“You’re so ugly you may as well eat that doughnut because only that doughnut 
will ever love you!” “Fat!” “Ugly!” “Infertile!” “Gah!” Ahhh, sing it, Tammy 
Wynette.

I remember the first time I listened to the Streets’ A Grand Don’t Come For 
Free, and I got to the moment at the end of the majestic last song on the album,
Empy Cans <https://play.spotify.com/track/2fJhYtCJLbFsRTPAQNgmD4>, when Mike 
Skinner muses, “My jeans felt a bit tight, I think I washed them too high, I 
was gonna be late so I picked up my pace to run”, and this difference between 
the sexes struck me anew. Again, I appreciate this is probably the worst kind 
of gender stereotyping, but I think I’m safe in saying that this is the kind of 
line only a male singer would write. A female singer, on the other hand, would 
say, “My jeans felt a bit tight, oh God, have I put on weight? It was probably 
because of that doughnut, wasn’t it? Oh sure, try to blame it on the washing 
machine, but we all know it’s because you’re a heffalump. THERE IS NO HOPE.”

Which brings us, eventually, back to the high heels issue. You, PM, as we 
established, see high heels and think, “Aha! Women wear them to look taller.” 
Women see them and know there is much more going on here, such as, just off the 
top of my head, looking thinner; looking more feminine; being able to wear 
clothes that only look good with high heels (which to me is like making a car 
that only works in sunny weather, but whatever); looking thinner; making your 
legs look longer; having a more seductive walk; looking more defiant; feeling 
more confident (if immobile); looking thinner; looking thinner; looking thinner.

So, as you can see, PM, there are many reasons a tall woman might wear high 
heels. The femininity issue is, I suspect, quite a common one, as height – 
bafflingly – is too often seen as an unfeminine quality in a woman and so, 
rather than being seen as yet more unfeminine by clunking around in a pair of 
flats, lots of tall women reach for the high heels. And yes, this makes them 
taller. Like I said, PM, being a woman is complicated. There might also be a 
bit of “Yeah, I’m tall – I’m tall and in high heels. What of it, shrimp?” going 
on, which I salute completely.

I think the real thing to take away here, PM, is that a tall woman wears high 
heels for many, many reasons, most of which will seem completely bewildering to 
you in your sunny, two-dimensional landscape. Don’t ask her to explain (she 
might beat you round the head with a stiletto) – just enjoy your sunny, angry 
static-free view.

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Emailask.hadley@theguardian.com 
<mailto:ask.hadley@theguardian.com>.
