
ITV should be required to make more current affairs programming in return for 
increased support from regulators, according to an influential inquiry into the 
future of broadcasting in the UK.

The inquiry, led by film-maker and Labour peer Lord Puttnam, said there was an 
opportunity to strengthen the broadcaster’s public service role and “recapture 
the scale and ambition of the best of ITV’s historic reputation for flagship 
current affairs programming”.

The suggested increases in the minimum requirements for current affairs 
programming are modest, moving from 15 minutes to 30 minutes a week of regional 
programming and the equivalent of 90 minutes a week on ITV’s national network. 
ITV’s licence currently requires 43 hours of current affairs programming a year 
on the national network and in 2015 it broadcast 63 hours. However, 90 minutes 
a week would be equivalent to 78 hours, the level required roughly a decade ago.


Related: ITV’s Peston looks to lay a glove on Marr in first rounds of Sunday 
politics bout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/29/itv-robert-peston-bbc-andrew-marr-sunday-politics>

In return ITV would get additional support including continued protection for 
its prominent place on the electronic programme guide and on future online 
services. The inquiry also recommends that, along with other public service 
broadcasters, ITV should be paid by platforms such as Sky which currently host 
its channels for free.

As well as increasing minimum requirements for non-news current affairs, the 
inquiry is calling for regulator Ofcom to embark on a review of ITV’s role in 
the UK’s broadcasting ecology and create an “imaginative proposal” for 
strengthening its contribution to democratic accountability.

Puttnam said: “There is a great opportunity here to reinvent current affairs 
television content for the 21st century, while building on the very best of 
ITV’s traditions. This would have the additional benefit of raising the game of 
other broadcasters, not least the BBC, by restoring the competition for quality 
that was a hallmark of the public service television world in the recent past.”

When ITV was established it had far more stringent public service commitments, 
but these have been steadily reduced as bosses argued they were hindering its 
commercial performance.

In 2013 Ofcom allowed ITV to reduce its weekday regional news bulletins from 
30 minutes to 20 minutes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/23/itv-regional-news-shrink-ofcom> 
but increased the number of regions targeted to 14 from eight. The regulator 
said audiences would benefit from more targeted programming. ITV currently runs 
20 minutes of purely regional news as part of 30 minute programmes in all 
regions except London and Granada, where purely regional news makes up the full 
30 minutes.

In 2015 ITV recorded an 18% rise in pre-tax profits to £843m, on revenues that 
grew 15% to £2.97bn. It has in recent years shifted increasingly into 
production through its ITV Studios arm, buying up companies such as The Voice 
creator Talpa Media.

Though ITV has been criticised for reducing current affairs output over 
previous decades, it recently launched Peston on Sunday, a weekly politics show 
fronted by former BBC business editor Robert Peston, one of a number of high 
profile hires.

An ITV spokesperson said: “ITV is proud to be a public service broadcaster 
with a strong commitment to very significant investment in original UK content, 
including international, national and regional news and current affairs.

“We welcome the inquiry’s recommendation that ITV, and other PSBs, should 
receive a range of regulatory support, including continued EPG prominence and 
the payment of retransmission fees. We look forward to reading the full report 
when it is published later this month.”


An spokesperson for Ofcom said: “Ofcom welcomes discussion about the future of 
public service broadcasting, to ensure it continues to meet audience 
expectations and needs. We will review Lord Puttnam’s report when published.”

The full findings of the Puttnam inquiry, which are expected to focus on the 
future of the BBC and Channel 4, will be published on 29 June.

