
Q We are altering our kitchen layout to increase efficiency. The existing 
units were built from solid pine and are still sound. I am hoping to re-use 
them, although they will need to be moved. Where can I get information about 
recycled worktops [preferably not glass], good eco-friendly flooring and paint 
suitable for covering the units' scuffed pine doors? Are there businesses that 
deal in second-hand kitchens?
Stephen Wells

A It's true: new kitchens are an expensive environmental and financial burden, 
the rule of thumb being that if you can reuse a piece then you should. New 
chipboard units contain formaldehyde resins, which give off gas toxins over 
time, so your solid units are a better alternative. I would advise recovering 
old pine doors with a zero-VOC natural eggshell paint (www.earthbornpaints.co.uk
 <http://www.earthbornpaints.co.uk>) - after all, why put toxins back into into 
a food-preparation area? For reclaimed materials, go towww.salvo.co.uk 
<http://www.salvo.co.uk>; they can point you to a salvage yard with recycled 
wood or stainless-steel surfaces that you can use. And Friends of the Earth's 
Save Cash & Save the Planet is worth a read.

Q We want to replace the cheap carpet in the living room of our Twenties 
house. We'd hoped to sand the floorboards, but they're in too poor a condition. 
So we are considering veneered board, but as the electrical and central-heating 
circuits run through the space below the floor, that solution would create 
problems should we wish to access them at some future date. What do you advise?
Brendan Sadler, Somerset

A If you do have any salvageable floorboards, use those and supplement them 
with additional boards from a reclaim yard (find one atwww.bremap.co.uk/bremap 
<http://www.bremap.co.uk/bremap>) before sanding and finishing them with a 
natural oil. Alternatively, lift your existing boards and have a qualified 
plumber and electrician check over and service the condition of pipes and 
conduits. Then re-lay the boards and cover them with a solid-timber floorboard 
(one with a Forest Stewardship Council, or FSC, certification), creating access 
panels at the relevant points if necessary.

· If you have an interior design question for Oliver Heath, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
