
Women still face unfair barriers to reaching senior levels of the Labour 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party, according to the Fabian 
Society, which found that just one in 10 of the party’s top staff and one in 
six of its council leaders are female.

The leftwing political thinktank said women make up 36% of Labour’s 
councillors, 30% of constituency party chairs, 16% of council leaders and 11% 
of the most senior Labour staff – defined as the executive directors, regional 
directors, the general secretary, and the leader’s chief of staff.

Labour has increased its proportion of female MPs to 43% through the use of 
all-women shortlists. But the Fabian study found that in areas where there is 
no positive discrimination, representation of women falls away.

In a survey of members, the researchers discovered female respondents 
reporting higher dissatisfaction with intrusion into their personal life and 
high costs of standing for office.

It found that 31% of women seeking national or regional selection as a 
candidate said they had faced unwelcome scrutiny of their private lives, 
compared with 11% of men; 22% of women said they had faced questions directly 
related to their gender, such as whether they might have children, compared 
with 8% of men.

Another 19% of potential female candidates said they faced unwelcome scrutiny 
of their appearance, compared with 7% of men.

The survey, based on responses from 3,000 Labour members, also found that 
almost half of women said they considered the costs of standing for 
Westminster, Europe or a devolved assembly too prohibitive, compared with 27% 
of men.

Among a series of recommendations, the Fabian report urges decision-makers in 
the party and in the leader’s office to “think carefully about future 
appointments and the need for fairer representation of women, and ensure all 
appointments are made through a transparent and open process.”

Since Labour has never had a female leader and has had only two female 
deputies out of 17, the report also calls for the party’s national executive 
committee (NEC) to “urgently review the rules around the selection of leader 
and deputy leader to guarantee at least one woman in the top team”.

This year there was disappointment among some senior Labour women, including 
Harriet Harman, that three elected leadership positions in the party – the 
leader, deputy and London mayoral candidate – went to men.


The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, also came in for criticism 
after he appointed men as shadow chancellor, shadow home secretary and shadow 
foreign secretary.

However, half of his shadow cabinet are women and he made Angela Eagle 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> his shadow first secretary 
of state, meaning she deputises for him at prime minister’s questions. He has 
also appointed the former Labour MP Katy Clark to be his political secretary.

Olivia Bailey, the author of the report for the Fabian Society and a former 
adviser to Eagle, said that although great strides had been made in gender 
equality among MPs and in the shadow cabinet, there was still a long way to go 
when it comes to “practising what we preach” in the rest of the party.

“The fact that 50% of the shadow cabinet and 43% of our MPs are women is 
brilliant and it’s thanks to positive action,” she said. “But as a party we’ve 
really led the way on this issue, so it is important we have our own house in 
order and make sure we are doing everything we can to make the party as 
representative as possible as every level. There are areas we need to do more 
and I think most people in the party would accept that.”

The discussion paper is one of six looking at the party’s treatment of gender, 
race, class, sexuality and disability, which will be tied together in an 
overarching report next summer.

It is intended to have an influence on the party’s own review of equal 
representation, which was ordered by Tom Watson, the deputy leader, and is 
being carried out by the shadow minister for women and equalities, Kate Green, 
and the NEC member Ann Black.

Green said Labour was making strong progress on female representation but 
promised to study the recommendations of the Fabian report as part of the 
review of Labour’s structures.

She said: “Huge changes are taking place in the party following the election 
of Jeremy Corbyn as leader and we are excited by what the new politics can mean 
for women. Women bring their distinct life experiences to politics and public 
life, and Labour is committed to maximising women’s participation in every part 
of our party.

“We are proud of our record as the party that has led the way, with more women 
MPs than all the other parties put together, a majority of women in the shadow 
cabinet, and Labour women leaders in Scotland and the House of Lords. Our party 
is determined to remain at the forefront of gender equality and women’s 
participation.”
