
✒How not to make a good impression at the Oxford Media Convention 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/oxfordmediaconvention>: apparently forgetting the 
hullabaloo about his vast pay and bonus package while he was running Channel 4, 
Andy Duncan began his first public appearance since stepping down by regaling 
the audience with tales of his wonderful recent holidays in Miami and South 
Africa. His remarks were penned, he told his increasingly restive listeners, 
while lying by a pool, bottle in hand, having earlier in the same trip taken in 
a safari and a Test match. A newly acquired I'm-a-fatcat-now pinstripe suit may 
also have been a factor in the speech going down like a lead balloon.

✒Luke Johnson's replacement at Channel 4, Lord Burns 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/nov/09/lord-burns-channel-4>, has 
apparently been acclimatising by watchingCelebrity Big Brother 
<http://www.channel4.com/bigbrother/>, which may seem unlikely viewing for a 
former Treasury mandarin. Monkey understands the allure has to do with QPR, the 
lowly club his lordship supports – Vinnie Jones was briefly the Hoops' 
player-manager – although the recent goings-on there have been almost as 
bizarre as those in the doomed reality show. So think first before you pitch 
ideas to C4, indies – could a QPR connection be factored in?

✒Alastair Campbell's strange feud with the Daily Mail – on his presumably 
therapeuticblog <http://www.alastaircampbell.org/blog.php>, he recently 
suggested that "Obergruppenführer Paul Dacre is secretly in love with me", and 
in the grip of "homoerotic fantasies that fill him with guilt and shame" – has 
come at an awkward time, as the former Blair spinner is now overtly in the 
fiction business and the publication of his second novel,Maya 
<http://www.fantasticfiction.co.uk/c/alastair-campbell/maya.htm>, is a 
fortnight away.

✒Even worse, it contains a very mockable long sex scene in which the married 
hero at last beds a celebrity actress who has been a close friend for many 
years, full of stuff such as this: "I gripped the expensive fabric of her green 
dress in my two hands and I tore it. With a shimmer, the silk fell away to her 
waist. It was the first time I had seen her breasts. Though there were several 
highly erotic scenes in An English Rose Abroad, Maya had never been filmed from 
the front. Now there they were, perfect objects of desire, my hands touching 
them and my lips moving down to kiss them ..." Anyone lined to do a hatchet job 
review in the Mail or Mail on Sunday will be rubbing their hands.

✒Thanks to Celia Walden, we now know the sad lot of work experience hopefuls 
at theDaily Telegraph <http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>. Only 
Piers Morgan's paramour knows why she chose this as the week's most vital topic 
to discuss in her op-ed column, but from it we learn that workies are routinely 
sent out to collect dry-cleaning or buy stockings – although "he got the denier 
wrong last time", a colleague moans in the unlikely setting (for luxury-loving 
Celia) of the canteen, weighing up whether to dispatch a poor chap to buy 
another pair – and that Walden employed her own short-term serf to "alphabetise 
a decade's worth of business cards, book reservations at the Ivy and spend an 
afternoon scouring London for a Tintin desk diary". After which, if she is to 
be believed, "a co-worker took him home to clean out her bins".

✒The 2010 edition of Campaign's handy guide to top media, marketing and 
advertising types, The A List, is just out and features a nifty revived ploy of 
asking the grands fromages "who would play you in a movie?" The answers include 
two Owen Wilsons (Tim Delaney, Juan Cabral), two Susan Sarandons (Lorna 
Tilbian, Sue Unerman), two Russell Crowes (Leon Jaume and, um, Tess Alps), some 
uncannily plausible suggestions – such as Nicola Mendelsohn's Barbra Streisand, 
Carrie Hindmarsh's Julie Andrews c. 1965 and Nicholas Coleridge's Jack 
Nicholson – and some good jokes: step forward Dawn Airey (Uma Thurman), Robert 
Campbell (Cate Blanchett) and Jeremy Langmead (Donatella Versace). In a 
particularly intriguing entry, Chime's Tim Bell plumps for Roger Moore, 
crustily harrumphs "I don't use social media channels", and picks La Perla as 
his favourite brand.

✒The pronunciation of Port-au-Prince 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/americas/8466973.stm> in coverage of the 
aftermath of the earthquake in Haiti has been a triumph for the "one BBC" 
mantra, with reporters and anchors on TV and radio all dutifully obeying the 
central diktat to treat "Prince" as if it were an English word – unlike the 
Channel 4 News team, including on-site anchor Jon Snow, who went for the local 
French version. This uniformity makes a striking contrast with the Beeb's 
chaotic non-policy on Nicolas Sarkozy, whose name until recently was oddly 
voiced to sound like "Star Cosy" by its Paris correspondents while UK-based 
newsreaders pronounced it correctly, with the last syllable stressed. But the 
outcome in the case of Port-au-Prince is a hybrid nonsense, as the rest of its 
name is pronounced French-style, with "au" as "oh" not "or". It's like saying 
Weston-super-Mare with the last bit Italianised as "Marr-ay".

✒Print coverage of the rescue and aid efforts in Haiti has often been by 
papers' New York correspondents, which has its disadvantages as they're usually 
to be found covering lighter stories – the Telegraph's Tom Leonard, for 
example, was tracking down a 60s lover of Harold Pinter just before heading off 
to the Caribbean. Monkey found no fault with their reports, but unfortunately 
they were accompanied by byline photos suited to their normal fare. So grim 
dispatches about death, chaos and starving citizens appeared under shots of 
Leonard and the Independent's Guy Adams wearing knowing smirks appropriate to 
showbiz features. Full marks to the Daily Mirror, then, as its Haiti team both 
had new or alternative byline pictures in which they looked horrified. And no 
marks at all to the Mail (once a leader in foreign reporting in Ann Leslie's 
heyday) forHaiti <https://www.theguardian.com/world/haiti> coverage that was 
late, skimpy and grudging.

✒Why did the New York Times announce it will be charging 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2010/jan/20/new-york-times-charging-content-online>
 for content, but in 2011? Little clarity came from an insider talking to the 
New York Observer, who explained that the meter system planned would be added 
to existing revenue sources because "it's imperative to build another leg under 
the stool, but it's not going to gush money". Crisper was an unnamed editor on 
the paper who commented: "It's so Times-like, right? We're going to take this 
bold step, but we're taking a year to do it."
