
One of the UK’s leading scientists has warned against leaving the European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, saying the country “cannot afford 
to be an island” in research.


Sir Paul Nurse, the Nobel prize-winning director of the Francis Crick 
Institute, said Britain was too small to be effective outside the “powerhouse” 
of the 28-nation bloc.

Related: Michael Gove: the big beast who gives Eurosceptics the leadership 
they need 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/20/michael-gove-eurosceptics-eu-leave-campaign>

The former president of the Royal Society also accused “naive” pro-Brexit 
campaigners, such as Michael Gove, of “intellectual laziness”. The justice 
secretary had said the amount of bureaucracy involved in the EU clinical trials 
directive had “slowed down the creation of new drugs to cure terrible diseases”.

Nurse told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “He is wrong about this. We have 
plenty of bureaucracy in the UK about this, I fight it myself.


“If we are to really make science work, we have to be part of the European 
Union, we have to influence the agenda, we have to make the regulations work.


“We are too small to be effective. We are an island. We cannot afford to be an 
island in science.

“If we are part of the European Union we are part of a powerhouse that can 
produce the data. We have to work with them and we will have no impact if we 
are outside. It will make it worse. It is naive, this argument.”


However, an anti-EU group has been set up under the Scientists for Britain 
banner.

Its spokesman, Prof Angus Dalgleish, of St George’s hospital, University of 
London, told the BBC: “We are standing up against what is a very large body of 
people who feel that if we leave the EU it will be a disaster for funding and 
collaboration – and we completely refute that.


“The bottom line is that we put far more into Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> than we get out. Any difference 
we can more than easily make up with the money we would save.”


Nurse told Today: “Moving away, just burying our head in the sand, it lacks 
ambition. It is simply the wrong message to give to our young scientists, young 
people more generally.


“We need ambition to succeed and we will succeed better with the European 
Union rather than turning our back on the EU over science, because if we do, 
they will turn their backs on us.”
