
As global leaders gather at the UN climate summit in New York, we asked 
development students 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/29/student-bold-ideas-development>
 what single action they would propose to reduce the impact of climate change 
in developing countries. We received 21 submissions from 10 countries including 
India, Denmark, Germany, Chile and Australia. Suggestions included the 
redistribution of agricultural land, producing electronics with sustainable 
materials, investing in large-scale hydrogen and solar power, focusing on 
reforestation, and prioritising climate change-resistant water and sanitation 
facilities. Here are our five favourite responses.

Invest in social security

Opponents of action on climate change like to point out that it’s just too 
damn expensive to do anything. Since developing countries need to focus on 
climbing up the income ladder, they cannot devote significant resources to 
fighting the impacts of climate change at the same time. Or so the argument 
goes.

But what if sound economic and social policies are also smart climate change 
policies at the same time? If that were the case, synergies could be leveraged 
and complementary actions implemented.

One of the biggest areas where this applies is social security. While many 
middle-income countries have introduced a social safety net, the poorest have 
yet to usher in anything resembling social security provisions that would allow 
for their citizens to live productive lives without the ever-present danger of 
illnesses, old age and unemployment.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> is only compounding 
these problems. With more severe weather events, health issues are more likely 
to arise. The old are particularly vulnerable to climate change. Unemployment 
figures can be significantly ramped up by droughts, natural disasters and 
changing marine resource bases.

In this context, a serious, if minimal, social safety net can help to bridge 
these dangerous gaps ripped open by climate change. A little can go a long way. 
While European-style welfare states may be expensive, smart and targeted 
measures of the kind proposed here need not be. Even in the absence of climate 
change, these policies would represent sound social and economic investments in 
the future of every country’s citizens.

– Tim Pfefferle, Bonn University, Germany

Increase cooperation between developed and developing countries

For me, the answer to successful climate change mitigation and adaptation lies 
in multilateral cooperation and innovation. Merely handing out huge aid 
programmes are not enough, we need to foster long-term public-private 
partnerships between developed and developing nations in order to ensure 
technology transfer and the creation of innovative solutions arising as a 
result of entrepreneurial spirit.

This cooperation could be in the form of CCCPs (climate change collaborative 
platforms) that will serve as an umbrella body of initiatives that will to help 
reduce the impact of climate change in developing countries.

For example, in India (my country), breakthroughs in sustainable agricultural 
practices as a result of research in partner countries has been beneficial for 
small farmers and workers. Therefore, the need of the hour is to work together 
instead of bickering over who should take the first step!

– Riddhima Yadav, Yale University, US

Natural resources should no longer be seen as a production line for economic 
growth

The relationship between economic development and environmental issues is 
stronger than policymakers first credited. Many forms of development encouraged 
by international economic institutions such as the World Bank and the IMF 
encourage paths to development that have been seen to erode environmental 
resources.

This relationship means developing countries suffer a sharp duality of burden. 
Not only does their limited economic growth rely on unsustainable resources, 
but as they continue to strive towards economic development, states have been 
seen to suffer environmental degradation that continues to undermine their 
economic development.

Thus, I propose to the UN climate summit in New York action that will seek to 
change the current discourse in “sustainable development”. Currently, natural 
resources are protected and managed in order to better improve the production 
process in a capitalist economy. This cannot protect states from rising sea 
levels, floods, droughts and other climatic extremes.

Instead, providing infrastructure and specialised institutions to states that 
are seen to be suffering the effects of climate change should be integrated 
into international development policy ahead of the current IMF and World Bank 
economically driven “sustainable development” discourse and action. Natural 
resources should no longer be seen as the production line towards economic 
growth. Rather, UN and state policy needs to address these two interrelated 
development issues separately in order to safeguard the world’s most vulnerable 
from further economic and environmental suffering.

– Beatrix Neville, Monash University, Australia

Penalise countries for failing to meet emissions pledges

My proposal at the summit would be to enforce a law that would fine countries 
that do not meet their emissions pledges set in the 2009 Copenhagen accord. 
Bric countries will also be eligible for fines. This money would then go 
towards subsidising adaptation projects in developing countries, especially 
those which are or will be severely effected by the consequences of climate 
change.

For example, the Maldives, currently facing the prospect of people having to 
abandon the islands due to rising sea levels. The developing nations of the 
world are going to be hit hardest by climate change. This change largely stems 
from the actions of the established developed nations. Nations who fail to see 
this, and show disregard to their emissions pledges, must be shown that targets 
are meant to be met. At the same time, they have a moral duty to aid countries 
in adapting to the new climatic future – a future that has been largely created 
by developed nations.

The proposal would have two core benefits: it would help in protecting 
billions of people in the developing world who face an uncertain future, and 
should give developed nations an even greater incentive to continue to reduce 
their emissions and reach their targets.

– Joe Camish, East Anglia University, UK 

Share agricultural production

I would propose a redistribution of agricultural land to the impoverished and 
landless. Large, privately owned plantations that focus on cash crops could be 
partially seized, and sections devoted to a “commons-like” setup – of which 
part would be devoted to organic/crop rotational techniques. The crop would be 
distributed to the families of the labourers and among the local population.

Such a transition of agricultural land utilisation would employ the 
unemployed, feed the hungry, cultivate native produce that would be consumed 
locally (cut crops being transported – minimises fossil fuel use), spread 
education and knowhow on sustainable farming practices, and drastically reduce 
deforestation.

A minuscule minority of the wealthy, landed elite would see diminished 
profits. However, the increases to employment, food security and local food 
consumption would promote civil peace. Meanwhile, the substantial decrease in 
fossil fuel use and deforestation would make massive reductions in the amount 
of greenhouse gases emitted into the atmosphere.

Practical challenges that may initially arise could include education and 
training on sustainable farming techniques, acquisition of tools and materials, 
and a just system of labour and produce distribution. However, such initial 
inevitable difficulties of such a societal shift are inconsequential growing 
pains when compared to the catastrophic events that will would ensue if such 
necessary change is not enacted to combat global warming and climate change.

– Patrick Rulong, Waterloo University, Canada
