
Health and safety guidelines can easily be overlooked in a busy work 
environment, particularly for small businesses owners who are juggling multiple 
priorities at once. However, making sure that your workplace is a legally safe 
environment to work in will ensure the safety of your staff and your equipment, 
improve morale and guarantee that you comply with your insurance policy 
requirements.

Here are our top tips for implementing an effective health and safety policy 
at work.

Know what you need – for your business

The 1974 Health and Safety Act <http://www.hse.gov.uk/legislation/hswa.htm> 
stipulates that it is the duty of an employer to “ensure so far as is 
reasonably practicable the health, safety and welfare at work of all their 
employees”. It goes on to say that employers must provide and maintain safety 
equipment and safe systems. This includes any visitors to the premises, such as 
customers, suppliers and the general public.

Of course, every workplace is different. The safety processes that you would 
need on a dairy farm might include wearing durable footwear, and passing an 
additional driving test for a tractor. In a restaurant, regular safety checks 
on the cooking equipment would be needed, fire alarms would be essential and a 
policy for the storage of food and raw meats would need to be in place.

If your business uses cars, even if they aren’t your owned by the company, you 
have to ensure that the time your employees spend in them is as safe as 
possible. Eye tests are one way to help. Recent research fromSpecsavers 
Corporate Eyecare 
<http://www.specsavers.co.uk/corporate/news-information/driver-eyecare-research-cost-and-care>
 revealed that 44% of employers stated they were concerned that some employees 
may not have good enough eyesight for driving, but only a third insisted 
drivers have eye tests as part of their driver’s policy.

There’s no one-size-fits-all policy for businesses, but the requirements from 
theHealth and Safety Executive <http://www.hse.gov.uk/index.htm> (HSE) can help 
you tailor yours accordingly.


Get the right help 

Appointing one person to safeguard the business’s health and safety policy is 
a good idea – whether it’s one of your staff, an external person, or even 
yourself. Having one point of contact makes it easy for employees to know who 
to consult if there are any questions, and provides clarity as to who’s 
responsibility it is to enforce and update the policy if required.

External providers, such as trade associations, trade unions, local councils 
and health and safety training providers can all provide guidance while you are 
deciding on the parameters of a health and safety policy. The HSE website 
providesmore information <http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg420.htm> about how to 
use this kind of specialist help to your full advantage.

Make sure everyone knows the rules

Once there’s a policy in place, make sure that everyone in the company knows 
about it. Give everyone who joins a copy of the policy and make sure there are 
copies in visible places to remind existing staff, and signs to inform any 
visitors of the regulations in place. It’s also worth holding regular sessions 
with your employees to make sure they’re up to date with any changes.

Review

Whether or not you created a bespoke health and safety policy for your staff, 
inherited it, or were advised externally, it’s worth subjecting it to regular 
review. Discuss the policy with the team, make sure everyone understands what 
is being done to improve safety and what they should do if they come across a 
dangerous situation. The key here is that there is an ongoing dialogue that 
ensures the health and safety policy is as effective as it can be.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Kia Fleet 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars.aspx> sponsor of the Guardian 
Small Business Network Accessing Expertise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/accessing-expertise> hub.
