
Guardian News & Media has become one of the first 500 organisations in the UK 
to be awarded theCarbon Trust Standard 
<http://www.carbontruststandard.com/pages/home> (CTS) in recognition of its 
work to reduce its climate change impacts.

The standard is awarded to organisations which have shown carbon reductions 
and put effective systems in place for carbon management, ranging from policies 
and investment to people and training.

Achieving it involved an audit of three years of data at the Guardian's offices
 <http://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/kings-place-emissions-recycling>and 
print sites 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainability/improvment-printing-sites-less-emissions>
 and an assessment of how carbon thinking is embedded into business culture and 
practice.

The CTS not only provides external verification of the company's data but has 
also helped GNM in putting together an effective framework for monitoring and 
reducing its footprint.

The certification process confirmed that the GNM reduced CO2 by 4,422 tonnes 
or 28% over the last three financial years ending March 2010.

Improvements have been achieved largely through technical improvements and 
investment, as well as awareness-raising such as a 'switch-off' campaign at the 
print centres in Manchester and London.

The carbon savings were achieved in part through:

 * The move from a number of older energy inefficient offices in Farringdon
 to a new building in King's Cross, London, which led to a 7% reduction in 
 CO2.
 * A revamp of the heating and cooling system at GNM's secondary office at
 Herbal Hill, London, which achieved a saving of 385 tonnes of CO2 over
 one year.
 * An upgrade of Guardian Print Centre Manchester's building systems,
 which is expected to achieve an annual saving of about 900 tonnes of CO2.

Claire Buckley, GNM's environmental manager, said: "It is essential that as a 
company we ensure consistency between our editorial coverage on the environment 
and operational practice. Achieving the Carbon Trust Standard is an example of 
how we really do live our values.

"The work on understanding and improving our environmental impacts and 
embedding environmental good practice into what we do as a business is 
something which has really made progress over the last few years, starting with 
the sustainable sourcing of paper and moving on to other areas of the business.

"We have an ambitious vision of being a carbon positive company, making a 
positive contribution to the climate change through editorial coverage, and 
minimising the negative carbon impact of our business. We are now at a stage 
where we've established operational good practice and short-term targets on 
carbon.

"The next challenge will be setting a more ambitious carbon strategy 
operationally, which brings us closer to our carbon positive aspiration."

To maintain the momentum of carbon savings at GNM, a number of new measures 
are being put in place, including plans to installing smart metering at the 
company's office at Kings Place and its print site in Stratford, London.

Even though Kings Place has already achieved a high rating for energy 
efficiency, further improvements are being made and a new investment project is 
currently being evaluated.
