
Conservatives <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> could 
replace Labour as the most viable opposition to Nicola Sturgeon’s SNP the Tory 
leader in Scotland has said.

Arguing that only her party can offer a “clash of ideas” necessary to hold the 
Scottish Nationalist party to account,Ruth Davidson 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson> said: “On tax, on policy 
and on the great dividing line of this political age – the union – we are the 
party which can give what so many people want: a check on the SNP’s power.”

“We’re saying to people: vote for us and we will do a very specific task for 
you – we’ll hold the Scottish government to account in the Scottish parliament. 
I just can’t seeLabour <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> doing that 
job given the decline they’ve had and the mess they’re in.”

Scottish Labour’s electoral troubles, combined with Davidson’s personal 
popularity, have led to speculation that May’s Holyrood elections could see a 
Tory surge. But recent polling suggests that Scottish Conservatives are not 
benefitting disproportionately from voters switching their preferences away 
from the SNP.

Related: Scottish Tory leader abandons call for lower taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/04/scottish-tory-leader-put-off-call-for-lower-tax-by-news-of-deeper-cuts>

According to the latest figures, they remain consistently behind Labour on 
both regional and constituency votes. Davidson has also encountered criticism 
amid accusations that she has failed to differentiate herself sufficiently from 
George Osborne on disability cuts.

She also used the lunch to promise that her party will campaign to repeal the 
contentious “named person” scheme. While the Scottish government insists that 
this scheme offers a single point of contact for children and families to go to 
for advice, support or early intervention, opponents argue that it has the 
potential to intrude too much into family life.

Calling the legislation “ill-judged, illiberal and intrusive”, the Scottish 
Conservatives leader said: “My fear is not just that it will heap extra work on 
health visitors and teachers, though it will, it’s not just that it completely 
changes the relationship between the state and the family; although it does – 
my real fear is that by spreading resources so thin to cover every child in the 
country that it will take away attention from the most vulnerable, making the 
appalling cases of abuse more likely, not less.”

The Tories, who abstained on the legislation at the time it was passing 
through parliament, would “prioritise its immediate repeal after the election, 
as the principle opposition party at Holyrood, said Davidson.

Scottish Labour also recently called for a halt to the controversial scheme, 
despite backing the proposals in the Scottish parliament.
