
It's been a week of firsts, all of them objectively bad firsts, but you know 
... it's nice when they learn things.

T had his first determined tantrum in a shop, over a specific item. Why? Thank 
you for asking - it was a wind-up duck. And if it was the first duck-related 
tantrum of the week, it most definitely was not the last. Then last night he 
had his first nightmare. Well, of course I don't know that, for who can truly 
know another man's subconscious? It was probably about that sodding duck. On 
Monday, in the car, he picked his nose and ate it. On Wednesday, he refused a 
food item with a determined "no, no, no", pointing in my face, like a miniature 
trades unionist who, if he's told me once, has told me 1,000 times that he 
won't accept this muck in the name of progress. It was so cute. I wanted to buy 
him a 70s jumper.

Thank you for asking, it was a frankfurter. He used to love frankfurters, and 
this reminded me of something I read a week ago, about toddlers refusing food. 
The parents are always at a loss, standing there going, "But I don't 
understand, you used to love parsnip ..." There's no mystery - babies will 
taste anything because they're idiots; toddlers want an energy-delivery system 
as efficient as possible, so they can get back to whatever element of their 
cyclonic behaviour they think is so important. Mostly, they will refuse 
anything that isn't bread or chocolate until they're 14. If your one still eats 
quinoa at four, that's because it isnot very bright.

OK, maybe I'm embellishing a little, but I always knew this. I remember almost 
nothing from before I was 15, but I have somehow retained very clearly the 
taste of a wholemeal ratatouille sandwich from my lunchbox (this was before 
Childline existed, otherwise I would have already reported it to Esther 
Rantzen). It wasn't just sloppy and messy and embarrassing and, by any rational 
definition of the word, not a sandwich. It was absolutely, profoundly 
disgusting, not like food, more like eating a hedge; yet I know that my 
mother's ratatouille is actually quite nice, so I deduced years ago that a 
child's system is not set up for complexity. It is only set up for cheese 
sandwiches.

I was very surprised, however, to have fallen straight into that parent trap, 
head first, like an idiot, where you think you have the special, super-good 
child who doesn't do that annoying/naughty thing that all other children do, 
when all you really have is a child who is slightly too young for the 
age-bracket in which that naughty thing commences. I genuinely thought, because 
I'd mashed so much squash, and energetically boiled so much pearl barley, and 
approached meals with an aspect of rampant enthusiasm, never distinguishing 
between treats and chores, never opening the door to the concept of duty, that 
I had raised a little food-polymath who would eat anything. And I've been 
showing off about it as well.

Actually, all that had really happened was that I'd raised a child of under 18 
months, and by the miracle march of time, he is now over 18 months.

Eating is the main example of this, but lying is another one: it's a 
developmental milestone when children start lying to you, because they're 
starting to understand that they have distinct interior lives, not necessarily
visible to all, and they're testing the limits of this invisibility. The last 
thing you want is a kid who always tells the truth, but at the same time, that 
phase when they're verbal but not dissembling, when they'll tell you absolutely 
anything, is very endearing, like idealised humanity in teeny tiny clothes.

So I had mixed feelings about this episode, which occurred between my nieces, 
Big D and Little D, on Monday (T wasn't involved; he was probably off somewhere 
testing the limits of his nostril). They had a fracas I didn't see, the little 
one started crying and I asked the big one what had happened. "D wanted some of 
my pasta, and she can't have it." "But haven't you finished with it?" "Yes." 
"Then why can't she have it?" She thought for ages, not wanting to admit she 
was being a dog in the manger. Finally, in a voice wedged between doubt and 
triumph: "I don't want her to get dirty hands!"

In fact, I didn't have mixed feelings at all. I wanted to give her a standing 
ovation; so inventive, yet credible. It was a moment of real pride; here she 
stands, a proper, lying Williams. I hope T learns this soon. Of course, he 
still can't speak. Perhaps he will lie with mime.
