
• Those who campaigned for the exposure of “fatcat” BBC stars’ pay will have 
been mildly gratified to see that those earning more than £450,000 a yearwill 
in future be named thanks to last week’s white paper 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/12/bbc-john-whittingdale-white-paper-star-pay-board>
 (though the agitators wanted £150,000 to be the threshold, which is David 
Cameron’s salary rounded up rather than DG Lord Hall’s). But they may be 
disappointed by how few actually make the cut, judging by last July’s BBC 
annual report which said only nine unnamed presenters trousered between 
£500,000 and £5m in 2014-15 – a number likely to be boosted by a few earning 
between £450,000 and £500,000, but also reduced because it presumably included 
Top Gear’s since-departed motoring musketeers, who reportedly were on £1.5m 
(Clarkson) and £500,000 (Hammond and May) in their relatively impoverished BBC 
days.

• So who are the seriously obese cats, as opposed to the merely tubby ones? 
That Chris Evans, Gary Lineker and Graham Norton belong in the replete elite is 
generally agreed, and others often cited as contenders – Fiona Bruce, John 
Humphrys, Andrew Marr, Jeremy Vine – like them combine two high-profile shows 
or one daily or weekly big gig and a scattering of others. Beyond that, 
everything is even more speculative. Huw Edwards, although he does markedly 
less non-news work than Bruce? Nick Grimshaw, who similarly largely confines 
his BBC work to his Radio 1 day job (but took over from Chris Moyles, who was 
said to be on £630,000 a year)? Clare Balding, who is expected to play a 
central role alongside Lineker in this summer’s Olympics coverage and to rejoin 
the Beeb’s tennis team next month, hopefully in a less deranged format than 
last year’sWimbledon 2Day 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/06/wimbledon-2day-bbc-admits-defeat-over-format>
?


• The key demand of John Whittingdale’s white paper is that the BBC should be 
“distinctive”, echoing the 24-year-old mantra of John Birt’s era as director 
general, as intoned in his manifesto Extending Choice. That the current top 
management are at ease with a back-to-Birtism philosophy was nicely symbolised 
on the very day the paper was unveiled: fresh-faced, hitherto spec-less 
strategy and digital boss,James Purnell 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/james-purnell> (who before his political 
career served under Birt as BBC head of corporate planning in the early 90s) 
appeared on camera for the first time wearing glasses. These were themselves 
suitably “distinctive” as they were so close to his former boss’s trademark 
rimless designer specs that they made Purnell look like a Birt tribute act, 
which may have been the idea.


