
I wonder how many British newspaper stories would be published if the new 
rules introduced by the New York Times 
<http://publiceditor.blogs.nytimes.com/2016/03/15/new-york-times-anoymous-sources-policy-public-editor/>
 were to apply here.

The paper’s public editor, Margaret Sullivan, revealed that the NYT has 
tightened its guidelines on the use of anonymous sources in an effort to avoid 
publishing incorrect information.

From now on, the paper will require any story that “hinges on a central fact” 
from an anonymous source to be approved by one of the NYT’s three senior 
editors.

A key section of a memo to staff about the decision states: 

“At best, granting anonymity allows us to reveal the atrocities of terror 
groups, government abuses or other situations where sources may risk their 
lives, freedom or careers by talking to us.

In sensitive areas like national security reporting, it can be unavoidable. 
But in other cases, readers question whether anonymity allows unnamed people to 
skew a story in favor of their own agenda.

In rare cases, we have published information from anonymous sources without 
enough questions or skepticism – and it has turned out to be wrong.”

Anonymity is not specifically banned, because its use, said the memo, “is 
sometimes crucial to our journalistic mission.” But the new policy is aimed at 
significantly reducing an over-reliance on unnamed sources.

It was drawn up by editors after several months of newsroom consultation. It 
requires one of three senior editors - executive editor Dean Baquet and his 
deputies, Matt Purdy and Susan Chira - to review and sign off on articles that 
depend primarily on information from unidentified sources.

Such stories, Purdy told Sullivan, are potential “journalistic IEDs” - bombs 
that can explode unexpectedly and damage the Times’s credibility.

Purdy explained that direct quotations from unidentified sources allow them to 
express “their impression, their spin, their agenda” without accountability.


Sullivan, in her take on the change of policy, regarded it as “sensible, 
moderate and necessary.”

Looking further down the memo, I noted that “as far as possible, we should 
explain the source’s motivation and how he or she knows the information.”


Sullivan pointed out that “parts of the policy have been in practice 
informally over the past few weeks, and the early results are promising.” Purdy 
told her he had refused to publish one article that relied on too many 
anonymous quotations.

She argued that there is a big difference between a national security article 
that cannot be written with on-the-record sources and stories which allow 
unnamed government officials “to use the press as a megaphone, to float 
politically sensitive trial balloons, or to disparage their enemies without 
accountability.”

So how, I wonder, would the Sun’s “Queen backs Brexit 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/6986518/Queen-hailed-as-a-backer-of-Brexit.html>
” have fared at the New York Times? After all, it “hinged on a central fact” 
from an anonymous source.

But the Sun is hardly alone. Would most of the UK’s political stories, whether 
in newspapers or on TV news bulletins, ever get reported under such rules?

Single, anonymous sources form the key part of so many contentious political 
stories. The Guardian’s readers’ editor, Chris Elliott, has tackled this topic 
many times.

A couple of years ago he wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/07/readers-editor-anonymous-sources-guardian-guidelines>
: “The use of anonymous quotes is widespread within newspapers and is, I think, 
particularly insidious when used to snipe at public figures in profiles.”

He was right, of course, but the practice has continued, not out of 
journalistic defiance, but pragmatism. No guarantee of anonymity for a source 
means no story.

Indeed, the New York Times’s Sullivan has also chewed this bone in the past. 
Annoyed by the use of anonymous quotations,in early 2014 she introduced 
AnonyWatch 
<http://publiceditor.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/03/18/introducing-anonywatch-tracking-nameless-quotations-in-the-times/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0>
, to reveal some of the worst examples.

The fact that Baquet and his colleagues, backed by Sullivan, have now seen fit 
to draw up new guidelines shows how difficult it has proved to curb the habit.

We know it’s wrong, but how else can we inform the public? I deal with editors 
and senior newspaper and broadcasting executives on a daily basis.

Few, if any, want to go on the record and there are always problems of 
motivation and spin. It’s just how it is and I accept it, albeit reluctantly.

Anonymous sources are both a curse and a blessing. The problem, of course, is 
in deciding which is which.
