
The criminal conviction of a Russian newspaper editor breached her right to 
freedom of expression, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) has ruled.

Yelena Mikhaylovna Nadtoka, editor-in-chief of the newspaper Vecherniy 
Novocherkassk, was found guilty in 2004 of causing insult to a politician. The 
journalist responsible for writing the article was also convicted.

The ECHR, sitting in Strasbourg, decided that the court in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> had failed to properly weigh 
Nadtoka’s freedom of expression rights as against the politician’s right to 
respect for his reputation.

The case followed the newspaper’s publication of an article which included a 
claim about “some thievish man from Altay” having “taken up a comfortably high 
position” and referred to MV, who was then mayor of Novocherkassk.

He brought a private prosecution for insult against Nadtoka and the 
journalist. A magistrate found the journalist guilty of insult, fining her 
10,000 roubles (£103.68), and found Nadtoka guilty of being an accessory to the 
offence, fining her 50,000 roubles (£518.61).

The convictions were upheld on appeal at two higher courts. So Nadtoka 
complained to the ECHR in 2005 that the conviction was a breach of her rights 
under article 10 of the European convention.

The Strasbourg court said the newspaper’s article sought to complain of 
corruption on the part of the mayor, which was a subject of public interest.

It noted that the domestic courts had failed to give proper weight to weighed 
Nadtoka’s right to freedom of expression, an omission it found to be 
problematical.


Interference in Nadtoka’s rights was not “necessary in a democratic society” 
for the protection of the reputation and rights of others.

The criminal conviction of Nadtoka was liable to have a chilling effect on the 
exercise of that freedom. As for the fine, the amount was far from 
insignificant.

It ordered Russia to pay Nadtoka damages of €4,000 (£3,050, or 294,459 
roubles) and €1,992 (£1,519 or 146,514 roubles) for costs and expenses.

Source: PA Media Lawyer <http://medialawyer.press.net/article.jsp?id=12143866>
