
England’s largest academy chains have “serious weaknesses” as bad as the local 
authorities they were intended to replace, Sir Michael Wilshaw has told the 
education secretary, Nicky Morgan, in strong criticism of the government’s 
flagship school improvement programme.

In a memo to Morgan published on Thursday 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/focused-inspections-of-academies-in-multi-academy-trusts>
, the Ofsted chief inspector singled out seven of the worst-performing 
multi-academy trust (MAT) chains, citing weak leadership, poor performance and 
lack of oversight as among the concerns found by his inspectors.

“Many of the trusts manifested the same weaknesses as the worst performing 
local authorities and offered the same excuses. Indeed, one chief executive 
blamed parents for pupils’ poor attendance affecting pupils’ performance,” 
Wilshaw said in his letter.

“There has been much criticism in the past of local authorities failing to 
take swift action with struggling schools. Given the impetus of the academies 
programme to bring about rapid improvement, it is of great concern that we are 
not seeing this in these seven MATs and that, in some cases, we have even seen 
decline.”

Trust leaders were not doing enough to improve attendance or behaviour, 
according to Wilshaw, who criticised a lack of urgency, insufficient scrutiny 
from trustees and confusion over responsibilities.

“Given that the academies movement was initiated principally to improve the 
performance of disadvantaged pupils, it is particularly concerning that many of 
the academies in these trusts are failing their poorest children,” Wilshaw 
said, citing the wide variations among chains.

Related: No proof that academies raise standards, inquiry finds 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/27/no-proof-academies-raise-standards-education-inquiry>

Wilshaw’s remarks are the latest in a string of controversial comments. 
Ministers are said to be increasingly exasperated at his almost daily 
interventions as he approaches retirement later this year.

A Department for Education spokesperson said Wilshaw’s report presented “a 
partial and skewed picture”.

“Work is already underway in all of these cases with regional school 
commissioners challenging these chains to show how they will improve and, where 
that is not happening, taking swift action – a sharp contrast to days when 
underperforming schools were left to languish under local authorities,” the DfE 
said.

Wilshaw said he was publishing the appraisal in light of “the government’s 
clear intention to move to a fully academised system and, in the prime 
minister’s words, ‘make local authorities running schools a thing of the past’”.

A DfE source said: “It’s surprising that Sir Michael thought he could produce 
advice on MATs based on such a skewed selection”

Labour seized on Wilshaw’s remarks as evidence that the government should 
scale back plans for all state schools in England to become academies, arguing 
that a pause was needed to resolve the problems.

“Ofsted has identified a number of very serious concerns within these academy 
chains. The lack of oversight, the lack of capacity within the governance 
structures and failure to deliver improvements are all issues we have been 
raising for months,” said Lucy Powell, the shadow education secretary.

“As the government continues, without evidence, with its agenda to turn all 
schools into academies and no system of local oversight to spot and challenge 
underperformance early, these problems will only get worse.”

Christine Blower, the general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, 
said: “Academy chains simply do not have the resources or expertise to resolve 
problems where they occur. The government needs to change tack and admit that 
its obsession with structural changes to schools has failed.”

Related: Ofsted chief criticises independent schools' lack of help for state 
schools 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/09/ofsted-chief-criticises-independent-schools-lack-of-help-for-state-schools>

Wilshaw’s letter was based on the results of inspections of the management and 
operations of seven academy chains running 220 schools across the country: AET, 
E-Act, Wakefield City Academies, Oasis, CfBT, The Education Fellowship and the 
most recent, School Partnership TrustAcademies 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> (SPTA).

“Given the lack of leadership capacity and the ineffective monitoring of 
individual academies in these trusts, it is surprising that some continue to 
operate over such wide geographical areas,” Wilshaw told Morgan.

“If we are to improve national standards in an increasingly autonomous system, 
much more needs to be done to reduce the variation in standards between the 
best and the worst academy trusts,” he said.

The most recent inspection of SPTA 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/school-partnership-trust-academies-spta-inspection-outcome-letter>
 was published alongside the letter to Morgan. It found “persistent weaknesses 
in the quality of teaching that prevent pupils making good progress”. The 
Ofsted inspectors recommended that the trust “urgently” improve, especially in 
its secondary schools.
