
Peigí on Jamie

What were you hoping for?
A good craic.


First impressions?
Younger than I was expecting. Nice shirt.

What did you talk about?
Mostly about him, but I struggled to concentrate on some of the multimedia 
chat.

Any awkward moments?
He had to tell me halfway through the main course that his name was Jamie, not 
James.

Good table manners?
He was overwhelmed by the prospect of eating prawns with his hands. I thought 
I knew better, so tried to demonstrate. I didn’t.

Best thing about Jamie?
He’s a bit off the wall, which I like.

Would you introduce him to your friends?
It turned out we already have one in common.

Describe him in three words
Funny, controversial, cheeky.

What do you think he made of you?
I have absolutely no idea.

Did you go on somewhere?
He took me for cheap Heineken and vodka and Cokes at a Dublin haunt I’d wanted 
to go to for a while.

And… did you kiss?
Yes, thanks to cheap Heineken and vodka and Cokes.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
Nothing – ambitions for a good craic were realised.

Marks out of 10?
7.

Would you meet again?
Romantically, probably not. As friends, definitely.

Jamie on Peigí

What were you hoping for?
A pretty lady, fun conversation and some decent grub.


First impressions?
Very pretty, well dressed and, crucially, very chatty.

What did you talk about?
Living in Ireland, “electronic dance-type music”, her love of Jeremy Corbyn 
and the ethics of ordering foie gras.

Any awkward moments?
Take your pick from my attempt to eat prawns with my hands to guessing her age 
wrong (in the wrong direction).

Good table manners?
Better than mine.

Best thing about Peigí?
She was articulate and funny.

Would you introduce her to your friends?
Absolutely.

Describe her in three words 
Open, talkative, cool.

What do you think she made of you?
I over-share and could have gone steadier on the booze.

Related: Blind date: ‘What was I hoping for? Vin Diesel’ 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/12/ross-hoping-for-vin-diesel-meets-charles-blind-date>

Did you go on somewhere?
For more drinks.

And... did you kiss?
Yes, only to say that we did.

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I wouldn’t have had the prawns.

Marks out of 10?
A solid 8.

Would you meet again?
I’d be delighted to.

• Jamie and Peigí ate at Coppinger Row <http://www.coppingerrow.com/>, Dublin 
2.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial of Soulmates, 
go tosoulmates.theguardian.com <http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
