
Elearning is quickly growing in popularity throughout the healthcare sector, 
offering a cost-effective and time-saving solution that can empower staff to 
develop new skills in a flexible, user-friendly way. However, like any other 
form of skills training, elearning requires ongoing assessment to ensure that 
courses are effective and up-to-date.


Verify course compliance

One of the first things to check before making a purchase is that your course 
is compliant with statutory standards. If not, it may be lacking essential 
information, or offer incorrect training. This will leave learners 
underprepared, and with potentially false ideas, which could put patient care 
at risk.

It is also important to note that even an approved course may not be ideal. 
Some elearning applications are unwieldy and require training to use, which 
could mean extra costs and more time out before staff members are able to 
access the material. Others may appear overly wordy and intimidating, which 
could make it harder for learners to engage and absorb the relevant information.

Find out if your provider offers after-sales support, and explore reviews to 
discover whether other learners have found their courses accessible and 
user-friendly.

Regular updates

A significant advantage of online courses is that they can be instantly 
updated with the latest guidelines and practices. This facilitates the 
implementation of new policy, and enables the rollout of new legislation to 
happen smoothly across the entire country. Furthermore, the information is 
presented in exactly the same way to every user, ensuring consistency across 
the board.

However, it is vital to ensure your elearning system is kept up-to-date, and 
that users are made aware if they need to review new material. Furthermore, if 
you have team members who do not have English as their first language, it can 
be helpful to look into courses available in translation.

Low-pressure learning

Another matter to consider is the availability of the course to users in their 
downtime. While it has been widely accepted that allowing users to work from 
home and at their own pace reduces the pressure and stress associated with 
training, there is an argument that round-the-clock access can have the 
opposite effect.

The suggestion is that busy individuals may feel pressurised to fit in regular 
learning sessions, even when feeling tired and overworked. This can have a 
negative impact on health and is also likely to mean they take in less 
information. Work with your team to determine a solution that enables training 
in accordance with individual schedules, not on top of them. You can also keep 
track of progress and follow up with individuals if they seem to be struggling, 
or you are concerned they may be doing too much.

Regular feedback can be extremely beneficial, as you can ensure each 
individual is ready for the next stage of training. It also enables you to 
adapt your programme to suit specific needs within your team, and improve it 
for the next round of training.

Reinforce new skills

Finally, while there are undoubted benefits to elearning courses, it is vital 
to reinforce the skills developed by following up with on-the-job assessment. 
This helps to cement the information learned, and ensures that knowledge is 
applied correctly.

If team members are passing the course, but still struggling with the 
follow-up assessment, it may be the case that the information within the course 
is not presented comprehensively, or in a manner that translates well to the 
associated tasks.

The gradual adoption of elearning can transform your workforce, facilitating 
the development of mandatory core skills with great efficiency and in a 
cost-effective manner. The trick is to manage the transition properly, and for 
more detailed insight you can download our free guide:How to successfully 
implement elearning into healthcare practices 
<https://www.skillsplatform.org/blog/How_to_successfully_implement_e-Learning_into_healthcare_practices>
.

Content on this page is produced and paid for by Skills for Health 
<http://www.skillsforhealth.org.uk/>
