
Lisbon Surf House


An elegant 18th-century house that once belonged to a count of Cascais, the 
Surf House has polished wooden floors, high ceilings and huge shuttered windows 
with sea views. Guests can chill out or mingle in one of the two living rooms 
and there's also a garden with a barbecue area. There's a mix of shared and 
private rooms, which can accommodate up to 18, and the house is part of Surf 
Lisbon surf school. Lisbon city centre is 10km away for those who have the 
energy to hit the Bairro Alto nightlife district after a day on the waves.
• Three-night surf packages from €175, surflisbon.com 
<http://www.surflisbon.com/>

Surfivor Surf Hostel, Porto

 Surfivor Surf Hostel. 
This new hostel is part of the Surfivor Surf Camp. It's on Porto's Atlantic 
boulevard, so has great sea views, and it's a five-minute drive from the main 
surfing beach, Matosinhos, which has waves for all levels. There are five rooms 
(two dormitories and three private) and the 1940s house has been restored with 
plenty of original charm – wooden floors, high ceilings and fireplaces. Guests 
can chill out in the garden or terrace before heading into Porto city to do a 
spot of sightseeing.
• Surf packages from €350 to €570 per week, including lessons, surfivorcamp.com
 <http://surfivorcamp.com/>

Helios Ericeira, Ericeira

 Helios Ericeira. 
Hidden away near the beach at Foz do Lizandro, just outside Ericeira, the two 
wooden chalets and small cottage at Helios overlook a quiet river valley dotted 
with farms. The decor is simple and each self-catering house sleeps up to four. 
The beach is right on the doorstep for those keen to ride the waves and you can 
chill out in hammocks or take a yoga lesson. In addition to surf lessons, owner 
Clara will help you arrange everything from an on-site massage to pony trekking 
along the sands or bike hire. She will also happily organise a lift for guests 
to go the shops for supplies.
• Four-night surf packages, including lessons, from €165, surfholidays.com 
<http://www.surfholidays.com/Destinations/Portugal/Ericeira/Accommodation/Helios-Bungalows.aspx>

Aldeia Da Pedralva, Vila do Bispo, Algarve

 Aldeia Da Pedralva. 
This is an entire village of traditional whitewashed cottages that have been 
restored as holiday houses – the owners saved the derelict houses from ruin and 
opened the accommodation in 2008. The rustic lets range from one to three 
bedrooms and, although they're self-catering, there's a nice central space with 
a restaurant if you want to mingle with other guests. Next to a coastal 
national park and with lots of beaches nearby, it offers plenty of activities 
for non-surfers, such as hiking, fishing, diving and biking.
• Houses cost from €71 a night (for a one-bed property in low season), 
aldeiadapedralva.com <http://www.aldeiadapedralva.com/hotel-overview.html>

The Surf Experience Surf House, Lagos

 Photograph: Dan Birch 
Set up in 1992, this was one of Portugal's first surf lodges. It's a big, 
bright house in the centre of the popular Algarve town of Lagos, and rooms – 
shared, doubles or twins – are brightly painted, to go with the party-house 
vibe. Surfers can swap stories on the two roof terraces or in the lounge. The 
owners (one is a DJ) arrange weekly barbecue and tapas nights, plus evening 
outings, but exhausted waveriders may prefer to check out the DVD library. 
Breakfast, lunch and surf lessons are included.
• One week half-board and surf lessons from €360, board rental €68 per week, 
surfexperience.com <http://spiderdesign.me.uk/surfexperience/>
