
I was in the job a week before I walked past the Proctor 
<http://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/proctor>. His black cloak 
swirled around his ankles like dry ice. “That’s God,” whispered my boss. I had 
to look again. I’d never pictured God with a comb-over.

He’d just been placed on gardening leave, which we knew was code for being 
frog-marched. But why? “Come on,” said Anvil, throwing me the patrol cart keys. 
“Everyone knows bits of the story. We’ll do a circuit, come back and glue the 
bits together.”

The Proctor, it seemed, had started seeing an anthropology director who’d been 
divorced for a year and was bored of speed-dating. One day, she came to work 
with stomach cramps and was persuaded to see the campus nurse, who discreetly 
told her that it wasn’t seafood making her ill, but galloping pox.

The campus nurse discreetly told her that it wasn’t seafood making her ill, 
but galloping pox

She shame-facedly told the Proctor that he’d have to be tested. He already had 
– because the dose had come from him. He’d been stopping off halfway on his 
trips to Australia, in the neon bedsits of Angeles City.

Word got out and the Proctor got mothballed. I couldn’t believe God had fallen 
so quickly. He’d just dropped £150K – almost his entire salary – on an office 
refurb. Cream carpets and a galley kitchen so long you could bowl in it. If 
only he’d set aside £11 for some condoms.

There’s nothing unique about the Proctor’s story. I knew there’d be an 
us-and-them culture when I started at the university; naively, I thought it 
would be academics at the top, not just anyone with a budget and an iPad.

As campus security, we’re at the bottom of a very long ladder. Our services 
director demonstrated this by announcing monthly one-to-ones with each of us, 
then cancelling them so soon afterwards that we thought it was a duplicate 
email.

His underlings use craftier tactics to belittle us, like not putting our 
overtime through each month, telling us we’re not fit to work in Woolworths, or 
offering us £350 to relocate to Iraq.

It seems barmy that these managers are on more money than the academics, who, 
if they’re old school, spent eight years studying for their jobs. No wonder so 
many profs turn up in old Levellers T-shirts. It must drive you nuts to know 
you qualify for Mensa, but the person above you has seen fit to move your 
teaching space into a Portakabin.

It's barmy that these managers earn more than academics. No wonder so many 
profs turn up in old Levellers T-shirts

I can understand why some of the inhabitants of Planet Corduroy erupt at us: 
being frontline, it comes with the territory. I just wish they’d erupt upwards 
– go for the cause, not the symptom.

A lecturer once phoned us ranting because a kid with Behcet’s syndrome 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Behcets-disease/Pages/introduction.aspx> had 
dared to collapse in front of him, and was now blocking the entrance to his 
teaching room. He’d had beef with us ever since he was a PhD student, though, 
when he demanded access to his office at 3am on his way back from a club. When 
we told him no, he screamed and then passed out in a hedge.

The worst flak we get comes from the Mocha Seven: our name for a cabal of 
administrators who drift from meeting to meeting, paper cups welded to their 
hands.

They were the ones who told us to abandon a fire in a timber-frame building 
and attend to the push-pad on one of their automatic doors, which had conked 
out. One of their number, a building contracts manager, used to phone every 
morning saying he was “on his fucking way in, and his fucking office better be 
unlocked”. It always was.

You can laugh at a lot of the sneering, but some of it’s ugly. A former boss 
drew a 1 in the air when an argumentative old guard died. The housekeeping 
supervisors regularly make a 55-year-old angina sufferer lug an antique Vax up 
the stairs.

But the real excitement comes when the higher-ups encounter someone who’s 
unafraid of them. When the gardening manager – a key member of the Mocha Seven 
– took over the security department, all guards were summoned to the boardroom. 
Anvil sat next to me. He’d got his name from the ’84 pit strike, when a 
copper’s baton had snapped on him.

The real excitement comes when the higher-ups encounter someone who’s unafraid 
of them

The erstwhile gardening manager was briefing us on a new Key Services centre, 
being built to house all junior and senior managers, and boasting the strongest 
security on campus (as well as mood lighting and a video library).

“Will students be allowed in this block?” asked Anvil. 

“No,” he replied. “It’s strictly non-contact. If undergrads want to speak to a 
member of the management team, they can phone, or use our online feedback form.”

“Then outsource it to China,” said Anvil. “Sack all the inhabitants, turn it 
into flats and move Key Services abroad.”

He rose from his chair and bellowed: “Just like you did to British Steel, ya 
vultures!”


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
