
For the 12 and a half years Gwen* was married, she lived the good life. She 
and her husband lived in Beverly Hills and spent weekends at their Malibu 
mansion. She had a closet full of designer clothes and drove an expensive car. 
She had all the comforts one can afford when one’s husband is earning $2m a 
year as a television producer.

That is, until one day in 2007 when Gwen’s husband emptied their joint bank 
accounts, closed the credit card accounts and served her with divorce papers.

“His company was in his name, so he was able to freeze me out of everything,” 
she said. Gwen was left without access to any of their shared assets, including 
cash. She was, in an instant, broke.

Gwen was a 21-year-old model when she got married and quit her job soon after 
the pair wed. Gwen had little money of her own, which made it hard to hire a 
decent divorce lawyer.

Related: Keen to leave your rich husband? Come to London, divorce capital of 
the world 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/feb/24/divorce-rich-husband-london-english-law>

“I called every bank. I had all these private fancy bankers. I even called 
hard money lenders. But none of them could help me,” she said.

Finally, a lawyer she consulted went online and found a company in New York 
that was willing to essentially finance her divorce. The company, BBL 
Churchill, was willing to make her a $250,000 loan, to pay her legal fees and 
some of her living expenses.

They charged her an interest rate of 18% to 20% a year – similar to that of a 
credit card – none of which had to be repaid until the divorce was finalized.

BBL Churchill is one of a new breed of financiers who are capitalizing on the 
high US divorce rate by lending money to the “non-monied spouse 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/feb/24/divorce-rich-husband-london-english-law>
” in order to finance premium representation.

“We step into the gap and provide funding to these asset-rich/cash-poor 
clients for payment of their legal fees and living expenses,” said Brendan 
Lyle, CEO of BBL Churchill. “The advantage of our product is, they don’t need 
to make repayments until their case settles. That’s unlike using their Amex 
card, which may or may not have been cut up by their husband.”

The main players in the “divorce lending” industry are BBL Churchill, Balance 
Point Funding in Los Angeles, and Novitas, a UK company that has opened 
branches across America and bills itself as “a specialist finance provider for 
individuals in the divorce process”.

The divorce funders have different business models. While BBL makes loans and 
charges interest, Balance Point Funding takes a cut of themarital assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/13/harold-hamm-sue-arnall-divorce-settlement-bn-dollars>
 that are won in the end. As such, it is choosy about the situations in which 
it invests: there must be at least $5m in the marital estate, and if there is a 
pre-nuptial agreement, it must leave their client at least $5m.

A former divorce lawyer, Lyle said he launched his business in 2011 after 
witnessing countless situations in which a man and woman marry, and while the 
woman leaves a career to raise a family, the man rises through the ranks of, 
say, Wall Street, and starts earning a multimillion-dollar salary. When the 
couple divorces, the assets are often in the husband’s name, enabling him to 
hire top-notch legal representation while the wife, or the so-called non-monied 
spouse, struggles to come up with a retainer.

“We’re trying to ensure that our clients aren’t starved into an early 
settlement,” Lyle said.

Those clients aren’t just women. Kevin McDonough, a divorce attorney in New 
York, has a male client whose wife earned more than he did. She continued to 
work at her real estate brokerage firm while he stayed home to raise the 
family. Their divorce involved divvying up their $20m estate, and while she had 
the means to hire a top-notch attorney, he did not – until he got a $500,000 
loan from BBL.

“He recognized from the beginning that he had a difficult spouse and that he 
wanted a certain level of representation,” said McDonough.

Without a loan, the non-monied spouse can petition the court to have the 
monied spouse pay their legal fees, but those motions are not always granted, 
McDonough said – and even when they are, they don’t always cover all the legal 
fees and on a timely basis.

As the proceedings go on, the non-monied spouse’s lawyer can be owed a 
substantial amount of money while the monied spouse’s lawyer is being paid 
regularly, and that can put pressure on the non-monied spouse to settle.


“The non-monied spouses generally feel pressure if they see all sorts of 
unpaid professional bills accruing, and they don’t know how they will ever be 
paid,” he said.

Legal fees aren’t the only bills that can accrue. There may be accounting 
fees, appraisal fees and investigative fees. With financing, the poorer spouse 
can hire a private investigator or an accountant to do an analysis of spending, 
to find undisclosed assets.

The non-monied spouses feel pressure if they see unpaid professional bills 
accruing and don’t know how they will be paid
Kevin McDonough 
Ostensibly, a divorce loan should provide a spouse with freedom to see the 
proceedings through on his or her own terms. But some have raised questions 
about the ethics of the divorce lending industry, such as how much involvement 
divorce financiers should have in the divorce negotiations.

According to McDonough, before his client chose BBL, he talked to Balance 
Point Funding but decided not to work with them in part because they wanted 
decision-making authority. “They wanted a more authoritative role,” McDonough 
said. Balance Point disputes McDonough’s claim and says his client chose BBL 
entirely for economic reasons.

There are also concerns about potential conflicts of interest, if the divorce 
lender is brought to the client by the divorce attorney, says Jonathan Gorman, 
a forensic accountant in Orlando, Florida who is often called in to divorce 
cases.

“I was at a conference attended by attorneys and CPAs, and an attorney brought 
in a brochure that was sent to his office on divorce lending. He called it “a 
malpractice suit waiting to happen”, Gorman said.

“The attorney was concerned enough by reading the brochure that there were 
ethical hurdles an attorney would need to consider before offering the service. 
He wanted nothing to do with it.”

Attorneys may be concerned that they are promoting the idea that the client 
take on debt and high-rate interest charges to pay their bills – a potential 
conflict that could be abused, Gorman said. Attorneys may also be concerned 
that lenders want information about the case that would breach attorney-client 
privilege, he said.

 “It can get complicated pretty quickly. When a lender is asking the attorney 
for information about the case that isn’t public, the attorney will consider 
whether that information is privileged or could somehow become a point of 
discovery for the other spouse,” Gorman said.

Also, non-monied spouses often have unrealistic expectations of what the 
settlement will be, and if they have access to a large amount of capital, they 
may aggressively pursue such settlements anyway.

For example, someone might spend an extra $20,000 in legal fees and wind up 
with a settlement that is $10,000-$50,000 more, but they’re not going to wind 
up with a multimillion-dollar windfall, he said. The final outcome is usually 
not far from the early settlement on the table, right after discovery.

Stacey Napp, who owns Balance Point Funding, says she has heard of a case in 
which a client of a divorce funder wound up owing more to their lender than 
they made in the divorce because the case went on longer than expected, at an 
annual interest rate of 20%. That kind of thing would never happen at her firm, 
she said, because she doesn’t make loans.

“It is impossible for a client to earn less than Balance Point on a marital 
asset claim payout, because our percentage never even approaches 50% of the 
resolution amount,” Napp said.

Lyle says he has only had one instance in which a client wound up owing more 
than they received, and it was an extenuating circumstance caused by one of the 
parties dying in the course of the divorce proceedings. The protection his 
clients have is that he won’t lend them more than 25% of what he anticipates 
the value of the settlement to be. If he lent them more than that, he’d be 
putting himself at risk, he said.

Besides, his business relies heavily on referrals. Unhappy clients aren’t good 
advertisements, he said.

 “You don’t get business by entering into deals that screw people over from 
day one,” he said.

In the end, the issue may not be whether clients are borrowing too much. It 
may be whether they should be borrowing at all. John Slowiaczek, 
president-elect of the American Association of Matrimonial Lawyers, questions 
whether these companies actually prolong the divorce process, by giving people 
the money to battle it out in court rather than reach a settlement.

“Some people say if you have litigation assistance, it encourages needless 
litigation. There’s some wisdom to that,” Slowiaczek said. “Sometimes people 
with wealth just fight for the sake of fighting.”

*Not her real name. We have withheld her name to protect her privacy.

Note: This article was updated on Thursday, February 25 after Balance Point 
contacted the Guardian to dispute McDonough’s claim about the reasons for his 
client not wanting to do business with the firm.
