
Dear Sam, just two days before my life was blown apart by a text message, I 
heard your dad telling someone how great I was with you. He sat across the 
table from me in a pub, and said how much effort I’d put into making you happy 
and comfortable in our new home. I pretended that I wasn’t listening, but 
inside I was beaming because it was nice to get some recognition for the effort 
I’d put in. But it had never felt like an effort. 

I met you when you were three years old – you are nearly eight now. You were a 
lovely boy at three; you still are. I remember the first time I saw an animated 
version of you, your dad sent a video of you saying, “My daddy says he loves 
you.” I didn’t know which was sweeter, your dad’s intention or your cute voice 
saying it. 

Your dad and I had a little girl a year later. It was a joy to see her propped 
up in her red chair while you spooned yoghurt into her mouth. There was an 
instant bond. She picked you out from the crowd as her brother; there was an 
undeniable link by DNA. 

My approach to the role of stepmum was to remain in the shadows until such 
time as you came to me – and you did

Finally, your dad found us a home of our own. I told you that you had the 
biggest bedroom, not thinking that you’d go racing up to the second floor and 
bag ours. We took you back down to the first floor and showed you the room we’d 
picked for you, complete with a little area where you could make a den. As the 
estate agent showed us round, I watched out of the window as you ran around the 
back garden with your sister. You loved the place. And the office in the back 
garden that you and your dad named “the man cave” made it even more appealing.

My approach to the role of stepmum was to remain in the shadows until such 
time as you came to me – and you did. It was usually when I was cooking in the 
kitchen that you’d hang around and have a chat, and I loved it.

You stayed with us each week, Monday to Wednesday, and I loved our life even 
more when you were here. You made it happier. It came as a surprise to me to 
realise just how much I loved having you around.

When I met your dad, the first thing he did was tell me about you. I said 
great and I meant it. I always knew you were part of the package that came with 
your dad, but I didn’t know just how much I’d come to love you myself.

I found myself defending you to the hilt when another family came to stay and 
they brought their son who said mean things to you. You held back tears and I 
felt such anger I could have thrown them out there and then, but he was just a 
kid with autism, so I told him in no uncertain terms that no one was mean to 
you in my house. I watched you sit that bit taller in your seat at the dinner 
table as a result. 

On Halloween, I threw a party for you and we made invitations to send to each 
of your friends. I covered the house in fake cobwebs. When your mum had another 
party a few days later, I took round what decorations we had left. It was the 
first time I’d properly spoken to her and I thought it would make you happy to 
see that we got on. You seemed much more relaxed after that and a few nights 
later you called your dad upstairs when you were in bed and asked if you could 
see us at the weekend too – not just him, all of us; you wanted us to go 
bowling together. You told him: “I didn’t feel that comfortable when you first 
moved in here, but now I feel extremely comfortable.”

He came downstairs with tears in his eyes and my heart pinched when he told 
me. 

Basically, I loved you for the time that you were, in some part, mine and 
although I knew I’d never have a place as special as your mum’s – and I never 
tried to – I was trying to carve out a little place just for us. 

Then that fateful day came along. Just two days after we’d sat in that pub and 
I’d heard your dad commending the effort I made to make you happy, I saw a text 
message on his phone that blew our family apart.

When I confronted him with it, I was furious, not just for breaking my heart, 
but for ruining the little blended family that we had. As a result, the trust 
had gone and with it our life together, your bedroom in our home, and 
everything you’d got used to and learned to love. After all, he’d already split 
from your mum before you were two. Didn’t you – more than anyone else – deserve 
some security? The words that I threw at him that morning were on your behalf 
as much as mine. You didn’t deserve it, you deserved stability just as your 
sister did, not another move out of this house. 

In a split second, any rights I had to love you were taken away

For you and your sister, I would have forgiven him if I could, but I couldn’t 
undo what he’d done, not even for you. 

I tried having him in the house for a few weeks, just to keep things the same 
during your visits, but I hadn’t counted on how upsetting it would be for me to 
see you and not be a part of your life any more. I couldn’t come downstairs and 
make breakfast for you all any more before school because I didn’t trust myself 
not to break down at the loss of you. I was heartbroken, not just for your dad, 
not just for our family unit, but because your dad’s mistake meant that I lost 
you. 

I knew that you’d be OK. I know that as long as your mum and dad are happy, 
you will be too. Your parents are – and should be – the most important thing to 
you. I know also that once your dad has a new place, you and your sister will 
go there and you will be happy, and I want you to be. But there is that selfish 
part of me that thinks, what about me?

Blended families are all too common these days, but when they break down, does 
anyone consider the loss of those children from the stepmother’s life? Does 
anyone think how sad I am to have kissed you goodnight, to have disguised 
courgetti in your spaghetti, to have attempted to sound cool when we discussed 
Match Attax, and then lose all that in an instant? 

In a split second, any rights I had to love you were taken away. 

Stepmothers have historically been given a bad rap, thanks mostly to those 
blasted fairytales. But what we actually do is put effort into loving a child 
that isn’t our own. We learn to love them and in your case it wasn’t hard at 
all. But suddenly, I won’t see you any more. So where does that leave us? 

It breaks my heart to think that you might assume I’ve just walked away from 
you without a care, but I’m not close to your mum and I’m too angry with your 
dad for ruining what I thought we had. I miss you and I can’t tell you because 
you’re not even eight, and you wouldn’t understand what’s happened – and I 
wouldn’t want you to. You probably just think I’m mean for kicking out your 
dad, if you think of me at all. 

So all I can do is write these words and, who knows, maybe one day when you’re 
both grown up, your sister can show them to you – but by then all the lovely 
things we did will be a distant memory. This is the price we pay for meeting a 
man who has children. It’s not having to take you on, it’s what we lose when 
you leave. 

All names have been changed
