
Q: My partner and I are looking to travel for two or so weeks round the end of 
August. We have found cheap flights to Dubrovnik and back from Istanbul. Can 
you suggest the best way to get between the two cities? We would like to travel 
by train as much as possible and avoid back-tracking. In particular, we would 
like to visit historic cities but also get off the beaten track. Are there 
spectacular train journeys or hidden gems we should include?


Mark Bonthrone, Edinburgh 

A: Going inland on any route through the western Balkans guarantees 
spectacular mountain scenery. But take a few days round Dubrovnik touring the 
town, beaches and an island or two. Then head into Bosnia to Sarajevo, a 
fascinating city, via Mostar, pictured, from which day tours take in the 
Kravice waterfalls and the Dervish monastery at Blagaj. Also consider stopping 
in Visegrad en route to Belgrade, Serbia, or Sofia, Bulgaria: you could still 
take in Mostar and Sarajevo, before heading back to follow the coast to Kotor 
in Montenegro via the walled port town of Herceg Novi. Most of Montenegro is a 
hidden gem. The country has great trekking and rafting and scenic drives as 
well as great beaches at Ulcinj – don't miss the journey here from Virzapar – 
and Sveti Stefan. Going this way takes you to Thessaloniki, from which there's 
a night train to Istanbul. Get to north-eastern Greece via Albania – Tirana has 
the most frequent bus services. Travelling via Skopje, Macedonia, is another 
option. You'll mostly be on buses for all but the long-distance journeys 
mentioned above, but try to ride on Montenegro's rail line heading into the 
mountains from Bar. Balkanology (balkanology.com <http://www.balkanology.com>) 
is an excellent guide to the region.

Q: I will be taking my children (eight and 11) to Israel and the Palestinian 
Territories for two weeks at Easter. We will fly into Tel Aviv on a Friday 
afternoon and wanted to take a bus straight to Jerusalem but I understand that 
as this will be Shabbat, public transport stops and life generally grinds to a 
halt for 24 hours. Is it better to just stay in Tel Aviv for that time or is 
there a way to get to Jerusalem without hiring a car? Also, I'd be interested 
to know where you think we should visit. We want to see the main historical 
sights and learn a little about life for both Israelis and Palestinians but 
also fit in some child-friendly activities. Finally, I've heard that hotels are 
jam-packed at Easter. Will we need to pre-book everywhere?

Sue Sullivan, by email

A: From around 4pm on Friday to 8pm on Saturday buses and trains will not 
operate, along with most shops and services. The last service on Friday on 
Egged, the national bus network (egged.co.il <http://www.egged.co.il>), leaves 
Tel Aviv at 4.30pm. The first service on Saturday is not until 6pm. However, 
Tel Aviv is one of the best places in the country to be during this period as 
night markets and cafes are open and bustling on what is for them the busiest 
night of the week.

For this reason, and for getting a relaxed start to your trip, consider 
staying a day or two in Tel Aviv. If it's warm enough, you can even hit the 
beach here. Then head north to Haifa, pausing at ancient Caesarea and the 
beautiful ancient port of Acre. Moving inland, Tiberias is the best place from 
which to explore the Sea of Galilee before you move down through the Jordan 
Valley to the Dead Sea, and Jerusalem. Take a minimum of three days here. From 
Jerusalem, make a half-day trip to Bethlehem. As well as the plethora of 
historical sites there's also an organisation called Open Bethlehem (
openbethlehem.org <http://www.openbethlehem.org>) which can guide you in 
planning a visit to more of the West Bank. Tours usually last a day but there 
are some homestay programmes allowing for overnight visits. The Foreign Office 
advises against all travel to Gaza. Buses link major destinations and are fast 
and frequent, and day tours can get you to most other places of interest.

Passover (30 March to 6 April 2010) overlaps with Easter week (2 to 5 April). 
You should certainly book places to stay ahead. As well as rooms in youth 
hostels (iyha.org.il <http://www.iyha.org.il>) and guesthouses you can try 
staying in private homes, who offer good-value rooms for the night. The Home 
Accommodation Association (bnb.co.il <http://www.bnb.co.il>) collects many 
properties together. Go Israel (goisrael.com <http://www.goisrael.com>) has a 
searchable database of properties.

Q: On short-haul flights, a friend of mine needs a temporary supply of oxygen. 
Most airlines have this aboard, but some require her to bring her own in quite 
heavy canisters. Why is there no common standard?

Joe Puma, by email

A: Simon Evans, chief executive of the Air Transport Users Council confirmed 
that there's little consistency from airlines. The reason is the lack of 
regulation on the issue. He notes that fewer airlines charge than used to. 
Those that do tend to cite that there is a considerable cost to them involved 
in supplying oxygen.

There are three basic models: some airlines provide it for free (such as 
Virgin), others for a fee (Ryanair) and others allow you to bring your own by 
prior arrangement (Easyjet). Whoever you fly with, make sure that you discuss 
your needs with the airline at the time of booking or as close to it as 
possible. It's a good idea to record details of this call such as time, date 
and who you spoke to, and get some written confirmation of what's been agreed. 
Confirm the arrangements around 48 hours before departure and bring medical 
certificates with you when you travel. The European Lung Foundation has a long 
list of airlines and their policies atbit.ly/1Bc126 <http://www.bit.ly/1Bc126> 
– but double-check this is current with the airlines involved.

Feedback

Further to the comprehensive answer you gave M. Blair re travel in from and to 
Slovenia. We have a house in the Slovenian Alps and travel to and from Slovenia 
several times a year.
The train service from Ljubljana to Trieste is now all but nonexistent. 
Presently only one direct service operates between Ljubljana to Italy (and 
vice-versa) a day and this is the Budapest to Venice Euro Night service(EN240) 
which departs Ljubljana at 0230 in the morning and returns from Venice to 
Budapest(EN241) departing Venice at 2120 and arriving Ljubljana at 0141 in the 
morning. These services do not call at Trieste although connections to Trieste 
can be made by changing at Monfalcone. Apparently the Italian Railways will not 
permit Slovenian trains into Italy because of the lack of compatible safety 
equipment.

Although Lake Bohinj does not have a railway service an additional very 
dramatic train service operates from Jesenice to Bled Jezero (close to the 
Lake) and Bohinjska Bistrica (the nearest large town to Lake Bohinj) and 
historic steam trains operate over this route in summer. As you quite rightly 
say the coach services are considerably more frequent and often considerably 
faster. They are not as pretty as the train journey.

Although we live in the North of England we usually have to travel to Stansted 
to take advantage of Easyjet low fares, Adria fares from Manchester are never 
discounted and will normally set you back around £350 each return. This year 
Easyjet are introducing flights from Manchester to Munich which will allow a 
cheaper train journey from Munich Airport to Ljubljana and we intend to try 
this out this year.

Whichever way you do it Ljubljana is well worth visiting at any time of the 
year.

John Watts, by email

For such a short distance, public transport between these two cities is not 
good. In the summer I found an express bus service that runs once a day in both 
directions. I used it from Trieste to Ljubljana. It took just over an hour and 
only cost about €7. It is operated by Florentia Bus and runs between Florence 
and Sofia - see http://www.florentiabus.it/eng/firenze-sofia.asp Don't be put 
off by the website description of what you have to do to get on it - I emailed 
info@florentiabus.it and they reserved the seats for me, I just had to buy the 
tickets at the bus station.

Theresa Hoare, by email

With reference to the question (Letters, 15 November 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/nov/08/ask-tom-travel-tips>) about 
affordable accommodation near Kings Canyon in Australia, try the Kings Canyon 
Resortkingscanyonresort.com.au <http://www.kingscanyonresort.com.au> which has 
budget lodge rooms (doubles for A$110 (£60) and Quad rooms for A$176). They 
have air-conditioning and shared bathroom facilities. There is also en-suite 
accommodation available. The resort is only 7km from Watarrka National Park 
instead of the 36km from the Kings Creek Station suggested.

P Halliday, Preston
