
My best friend, J, memorably said of pregnancy: you get fat and you can't 
drink. It's the worst two things that can happen to a woman. That's pretty much 
the final word, isn't it? I'd have it made into a T-shirt, except that for some 
reason I hate people in T-shirts.

Oh yeah, I have remembered other things that I also hate about pregnancy: I 
get really, really angry. Also, there is something inherently embarrassing 
about having to announce it. I found it pretty humiliating last time, but at 
least then it was a slight surprise. So when I said, "I have some news," it was 
actually news, not just, "Yeah, yeah, pregnant again ..." There is nothing more 
boring for other people than getting pregnant for a second time. Pff. Possibly 
getting pregnant for a third time.

So you're at a complete disconnect with the rest of the world because to you, 
all the factors are exactly the same or, if anything, amplified. I am exactly 
the same amount of tired, except more, and I have exactly the same discomforts, 
only they are worse. I'm exactly the same amount of excited, except more so, 
because last time I couldn't really conceive of what it would be like, so all I 
had to go on was people rolling their eyes and saying, "You won't know what's 
hit you!" (What is it with parents? They have absolutely no compunction about 
singing a lullaby at full volume on a crowded bus, but they are too coy to tell 
you that there's enjoyment to be had from children.) I am exactly the same 
amount of worried, yik yak yik yak - everything is exactly the same. Whereas to 
the outsider - even, I suspect, the outsider who is only partially outside 
like, for instance, its father - you are just doing that thing you've already 
done, again. Like you've had your bathroom done up, and they listened to you 
complaining about pipes all the way through that, and now they have to hear it 
all again because you're doing the downstairs loo? Are youserious?

I have a droll friend who said, "At least you're not young. When young people 
tell me they're pregnant, all I can think of is that they must have had sex." 
Ho ho. How I laughed. But anyway, it's not the sex thing, it's more like a 
primal shame about being so visibly, inescapably, an animal, breeding, like in 
a zoo. Probably if I wasn't pregnant, I would say it's a social construct; you 
just have to brazen out what feels like shame but is actually the misdirected 
disapproval of incredibly repressed people. But I am forced to admit that I was 
right the first time, and it is not other people's fault: it is embarrassing, 
wandering about confused, out of sorts, like a concussed bull. I feel out of 
place because I am. I would be better off in a pen.

I was moaning to my brother about it, and he said, "Well, look on the bright 
side ..." and I thought for one insane second he might be about to say 
something nice, like, "At least you don't look very pregnant," or, "It is just 
your perception that you are slow and bovine. In truth, you fizz with insight 
and ... etc," But he actually ended ... "at least you work from home". The 
Henrician practice of barricading pregnant women into rooms then setting fire 
to herbs is beginning to make a certain amount of sense. But that is only for 
the last month. History doesn't relate how you are supposed to kill the first 
eight.

It is outrageous, of course, that I dare to whine about this at all, when I 
only found out I was pregnant at 20 weeks. Considering that last time I found 
out at two weeks, this pregnancy is functionally four months shorter than the 
last one. It is such a good deal that I am often to be heard ruminating how 
good it would be to have a partial surrogate, who could do the boring first 
half and then hand it over for the bit where everything happens. Then someone 
always asks me how this would work, exactly, and I say: not literally, youidiot
. You T-shirt-wearing fool! I'm just extemporising.Thinking outside the box.

On the plus side, there is almost no festival on earth that is enhanced by 
being pregnant and already having a toddler. Apart from Easter ... all I fancy 
is chocolate buttons, and T was given a mountain of chocolate buttons. He 
doesn't even know! It's brilliant.
