
To some of us autistic people it’s like a big dangerous world out there that 
we just don’t understand.

Having Asperger’s is like constantly having a heart attack that can’t kill 
you. Walking into a room full of people is like trying to look at the sun. I 
would just have to walk out, I wouldn’t be able to bear it. Being in a busy 
place is really hard, I probably wouldn’t be able to cope – people are zooming 
fast and coming out at you all the time. I have to try to keep myself hidden.


I don’t like to be looked at a lot of the time, for me that feels like it’s 
rude. I like to be hidden because I feel like lots of people stare at me and it 
makes me feel worried. If there’s a loud noise, it feels like a big boom that 
can kill you. I also don’t like super-quiet noises because it feels like a 
really terrible thing, it tickles in an unpleasant way. I have super-sensitive 
hearing so when there are public address announcements at the supermarket or 
train station it’s really scary and hurts my ears. I am always very scared that 
a fire alarm or a siren might go off.


When people touch me, it feels like a spider or something else that you are 
absolutely afraid of and it makes you go crazy. It’s just a horrible, horrible 
feeling and people need to respect that, but they don’t. They think I’m the 
mean one. I can’t go into a lot of shops and restaurants because they smell too 
strong and because the waiters and assistants come up too close, so I don’t 
want to look at them but I know they think I’m rude so I have to try and suffer 
it.


If there’s a weird texture it can make me feel sick or crazy, it can make me 
do something that wouldn’t be “normal” like wriggling my arms or jerking about 
because I feel like I need to make my actual bones shake, to get air on to me, 
and to get rid of the bad feeling as quickly as I can. Sometimes I have to 
scratch feelings off my skin. I can see how things feel, it sounds crazy but 
it’s true. For example, I don’t like carrier bags for how they feel so I can’t 
even see one without feeling sick and angry.


Sometimes if there are too many things going on at once I can feel crazy and 
act mad like a dog or a cat or something… I can make noises to make myself feel 
better as I feel more in control but that makes people look at me and then I 
feel worse.


For me, a surprise can make me rage. Even tiny things can make me cry. 
Sometimes I feel like my body has a mind of its own. Something happening 
suddenly that I can’t immediately explain can make me run away, even if I might 
be putting myself in danger. If I have been out somewhere, I might need to 
spend a couple of days in bed to try and recover and get my senses under 
control.


Some people think that because some autistic people don’t like to wear clothes 
all the time (because it feels strange to them), or wear ear defenders, they 
think it’s rude or annoying and bad and think we’re bad people or we have bad 
parents but that’s just not true. For example, I like to stick my tongue out 
because it feels really good, I’m not being rude.


BUT IT’S NOT A THING THAT NEEDS TO BE FIXED, NO ONE SHOULD BE ASHAMED OF ME OR 
ANYONE LIKE ME, I’M JUST ME.

To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
www.autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
