
Q I want to replace a worn fitted living room carpet. The room contains a lot 
of furniture, plus a piano. Carpet firms have quoted exorbitant prices for 
moving furniture during the fitting, with no guarantee that damage would not be 
caused. The only solution I can see is for me to remove the carpet piecemeal 
and fit carpet squares. How would I tackle this? Or is there another solution?
Christine, Penrith

A It sounds like carpet tiles are the answer. Try InterfaceFLOR (
www.interfaceflor.eu <http://www.interfaceflor.eu>), an environmental and 
design-focused carpet-tile company with a huge selection of styles. There are a 
number of positive benefits to using carpet tiles - you can fit the tiles one 
by one, so there's no heavy lifting and minimal wastage. In addition, should 
they get damaged or worn they can be replaced one by one. Lastly, InterfaceFLOR 
will recycle your old tiles. As these tiles are thick and tricky to cut, I 
recommend an experienced fitter (speaking from experience - a nasty cut to my 
leg and a few stitches, ouch!).

Q I don't like the harsh light of energy-saving bulbs. How can I create a 
softer look when incandescent bulbs are phased out?
Bridget, Birmingham

A The quality of light given off by energy-saving bulbs has been a turn-off 
(no pun intended) for many. However, a saving of £90 per bulb over its lifespan 
and a reduced carbon footprint means they really are the choice of the future. 
My advice is to find ways to shield the glare from the lamp and bounce or 
filter the light. Why not use an oversized shade that fully covers the bulb, or 
vintage chandeliers to obscure it and add glamour? However, increasingly 
designers are realising that the lower heat output of low-energy bulbs means 
you can put unconventional materials next to them without them melting or 
igniting. One of my favourites is Nahoko Koyama's 'Delight' shade made from 
wool felt - available from my own website,www.ecocentric.co.uk 
<http://www.ecocentric.co.uk>. And Thorsten Van Elten sells a Crochet Lampshade 
designed only to be used with a low-energy bulb (www.thorstenvanelten.com 
<http://www.thorstenvanelten.com>).

·  If you have an interior design question for Oliver, email 
ask.oliver@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.oliver@observer.co.uk>
