
• Tricky choices as Euro 2016 approaches for Radio Times 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-times>, which has gone for four 
different covers for its current issue: Come on England!, Come on Wales! and 
Come on Northern Ireland!, and a neutral one with a lot of footballs for those 
supporting none of the above. It’s a ploy that might have worked had the home 
nations all been in separate groups, but which makes the magazine look 
two-faced given that England and Wales play each other on 16 June. Still, at 
least there are no footballers on these fronts, removing so far the risk of the 
“curse of the Radio Times” seen when the weekly put Steven Gerrard on the cover 
of its issue heralding the 2014 World Cup.

• Is BBC2 <http://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> desperate to show that its 
raunchy Gallic acquisition Versailles is serious history rather than just a 
series of pretexts for sex scenes? Monkey only asks because one historian 
fronting a single complementary factual programme is usually deemed sufficient 
for historical dramas. Versailles, in contrast, was preceded by Helen Castor 
and Lucy Worsley’s 55-minute The Real Versailles and immediately followed by 
Greg Jenner and Kate Williams’s Inside Versailles, the first of 10 five-minute 
tail pieces. Four historians, and a total of nearly two hours’ history over 
three days, looks a little like sheepish over-compensation.

• Ipso chairman Sir Alan Moses was on fine form last week as a guest of the 
Media Society. On the press regulator’s failure to act over Katie Hopkins’s Sun 
column calling migrants “cockroaches”: he was frustrated by the decision (“I am 
only one of 12”) since it was “so disgusting”. On the supreme court’s upholding 
of the injunction in the celebrity threesome case: he was not surprised, 
because “there is a real problem” since judges “don’t read the popular press”. 
Asked if Ipso was making a difference, Moses seemed to suggest that newspapers 
were wary of the regulator, citing “Tony Gallagher even going on to the Home 
Service” (ie Radio 4’s Today) when censured for the Sun’s splash about the 
Queen as “showing a certain sensitivity”.

• Olympic medallist Jonathan Edwards got himself in a spin introducing some of 
his fellow Eurosport presenters at a star-studded press event the sports 
station’s parent company Discovery held in Paris during the French Open. 
Talking about Ilie Nastase, Chris Evert, John McEnroe and Mats Wilander to the 
assembled journalists, the amiable Edwards said he was in awe as they were 
heroes of his growing up. The tennis legends joked that made them feel 
incredibly old. “I grew up watching you guys on TV,” explained the 
silver-haired triple jumper. Evert volleyed back: “That’s even worse!”. Edwards 
returned with a searing backhand: “It was a black and white TV.” “What?!” 
exclaimed Evert. Advantage Mr Edwards. But the award for most laidback man at a 
press conference has to go to Nastase. During questions he took a call on his 
mobile. Shrugging, he laconically explained that he needed to answer it as it 
was one of his ex-wives. Game, set and match Mr Nastase.

• Oscar Cainer, the “brilliant” new astrologer introduced by the Daily Mail 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> last week, apparently has an 
uncanny insight into the psyche of editor Paul Dacre. “Don’t be fooled into 
thinking you’re too hard to love,” he bluntly told Dacre and other Scorpios in 
his debut on Monday. “There’s a vast ocean of genuine emotion inside you 
waiting for the right shore to crash on.” Tuesday, however, saw him asking “are 
you needlessly obsessing about something right now?”, while Thursday’s message 
was “whatever it is that is too personal for you to share, just make sure you 
don’t shy away from the opportunity that presents itself today”; and on Friday 
Dacre was again urged to risk truth-telling – “clear communication will improve 
an important relationship this weekend”. Which could of course just mean 
shouting at someone rather than confessing a secret, so it’s not such a bold 
forecast about the combustible editor’s weekend as it superficially seems to be.

• Curiously, Oscar has a rival in the form of his late uncle Jonathan, 
although the latter anointed him as his successor before his death in early 
May. That’s because “Jonathan prepared his forecasts before publication”, in 
the words of the Mail on Sunday, which (unlike its hated sister title) has 
decided “to continue to publish those he had completed”. In the latest example, 
Cainer Sr’s approach to Dacre differs markedly from his nephew’s, making 
flattering statements rather than banging on about Heathcliffian passions and 
emotional openness. A current astral alignment reflects “your immense 
sensitivity and deep, secret propensity to be powerful,” purrs last weekend’s 
posthumous bulletin for Scorpios. “You are about to taste great success,” the 
spectral seer concludes, presumably foreseeing in the stars last week’s NRS 
readership figures showing the Mail/Mail Online monthly audience growing to 29 
million.

•*Surely it can’t be true that Sky had to scramble to find an alternative 
venue for its prestigious EU referendum debate, because the main studio on its 
fabulous new campus had been booked for Harry Hill and the booker wouldn’t 
budge? Amazingly yes, a Sky snout confides to Monkey, although the official 
line was that there was no panic, no frantic dashing around and noisy 
set-building in order to implement Plan B.
