
I have no idea why I feel this compulsion to explain things to you. Maybe it’s 
my way of drawing this brief chapter to a close. Or maybe it’s because I 
believe that people touch each other even when their paths cross so fleetingly. 
We should touch with care and with humility, although we often fail to do so in 
matters of the heart.

For days after we met, I felt elated. There was a moment late in the evening 
when we held each other’s gaze amid the heady whirl of drunken conversation. 
You cocked your head a few degrees to the right and smiled. I knew you were 
thinking:it’s you. I realised then that I had assumed that no one would look at 
me that way again. But how much I missed it! I enjoyed it for a split second 
before the guilt announced itself – had I given you the impression I was 
available?

For the first time in my life I began to assess the possibility of an affair. 
My marriage wasn’t always happy, but I had managed to hold my doubts at bay 
because I was so determined that I didn’t want anyone else. I was sure this was 
true, until it no longer was.

I am convinced I would have felt the same pull towards you if I were single; I 
will never know how much my being married was part of my appeal to you.

I have never had to reflect on the possible disconnect between fantasy and 
reality so deeply.

And I’d never given this extra-marital territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/may/20/extramarital-sex-affair-arnold-schwarzenegger-fred-goodwin>
 much consideration. I didn’t necessarily judge others who had affairs, I just 
figured it wasn’t for me. I couldn’t be arsed. My happiness is so bound up in 
the happiness of others. How on earth could I find it at their expense? I told 
you that I needed to do the right thing. But what is the right thing for you, 
you asked?

Maybe I’m a coward, but I can’t start something I know will reap pain if I 
have a choice not to do it

I couldn’t talk to my friends, so I furiously Googled the outcomes and upshots 
of affairs. Maybe I had hoped to find validation, some kind of unlikely 
consensus that they were good for everyone involved. Instead, I found a 
quagmire of unhappiness, vitriol and regret;people whose lives had been ripped 
apart 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/01/daughter-cannot-forgive-affair-moved-out-rebuild-relationship-split-mother>
. Many of the most devastated were the unfaithful ones.

I see how easily people slip into these situations. How else do you find out 
whether that spark – which seems so much brighter than any you’ve experienced – 
is real, or dramatically amplified by the knowledge that what you want in that 
moment isn’t rightfully yours? Maybe I’m a coward, but I can’t start something 
I know will reap pain if I have a choice not to do it.

You may be the one, but I’m not free to find out. It feels like I’m letting 
you down, and yet I suspect it’s me who would ultimately hurt the most. You 
have no claim on someone you’re sneaking around with. The prospect of grieving 
over a break-up from within a marriage to a third – innocent – person is too 
painful to contemplate and too ludicrous to allow.

I’m at an age where heartbreaking things have started to happen to those 
around me. Life is short and increasingly cruel. From a certain perspective 
this seems like a very good reason to indulge your own needs. From another, 
complete idiocy: why hurt people when you don’t have to?

Anonymous
