
Vital evidence about phone hacking was withheld from the Press Complaints 
Commission <http://www.theguardian.com/media/pcc> when it held its inquiries 
into the News of the World's interception of voicemail messages.

The PCC was not informed by the Mail newspaper organisation that four of its 
Mail on Sunday <http://www.theguardian.com/media/mailonsunday> journalists had 
been told by the police in 2006 that their mobile phones had been hacked.

Peter Wright, the then Mail on Sunday editor, was made aware of the hacking 
but did not publish the fact at the time, and it remained a secret for eight 
years until it emerged in evidence at the recent hacking trial.

Wright, personally a member of the PCC from May 2008, took over the place held 
by his boss, the Daily Mail's editor-in-chief Paul Dacre, who had served on the 
body from 1999 to April 2008. Two reports about hacking issued by the PCC in 
2007 and 2009, which reinforced News International's "rogue reporter" defence, 
were compiled in ignorance of crucial information from the Mail group. Nor was 
the hacking of the four staff mentioned in evidence to theLeveson inquiry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry> given by Wright and Dacre in 
2012.

Guardian journalist Nick Davies, in his new book Hack Attack, explores the 
implications of the long silence, which he maintains was in effect supportive 
of "the lies" told by Rupert Murdoch's organisation.

It allowed Murdoch executives to get away with their cover-up by pretending 
that hacking was restricted to just eight victims, who were identified at the 
original trial of the News of the World's royal editor, Clive Goodman, and the 
paper's contracted private investigator, Glenn Mulcaire.

Three of them were royal aides. The other five were model Elle Macpherson, 
publicist Max Clifford, MP Simon Hughes, football agent Sky Andrew and Gordon 
Taylor, chief executive of the Professional Footballers' Association.

But the Mail on Sunday kept quiet about the four staff who were hacked – 
investigations editor Dennis Rice, news editor Sebastian Hamilton, deputy news 
editor David Dillon and feature writer Laura Collins.

The paper's managing editor, John Wellington, spoke to Rice and Collins in 
October 2006 – two months after Goodman and Mulcaire were arrested – about the 
police having informed him that their mobile phones had been hacked between 
April and July 2006. Wellington then told his editor, Wright, what had happened.

Rice recalls that he was first called by the police, who told him he had been 
hacked 80 times, before he discussed it with Wellington. He later discovered 
that his office computer had also been hacked. Collins, in a 2011 article about 
the incident, wrote: "We were advised to change the security settings on our 
phones … It was a shocking revelation."

But the four were not required to be prosecution witnesses against Mulcaire. 
Wellington, who remained unaware of the computer hacking, said the police 
approached the paper so that its staff could change their mobile pin numbers.

In his book Davies argues that the Mail's silence "was particularly weird" 
because of Dacre's being a PCC member when the commission's first report was 
compiled. And Wright was on the commission when the 2009 report was written, a 
report that was critical of the Guardian's revelations of widespread hacking 
and which was later withdrawn when the paper's reports proved to be true.

During his evidence to the Leveson inquiry, Wright said: "The PCC did ask News 
International whether it went beyond Clive Goodman. They assured the PCC it 
didn't. We didn't have really a proper means of testing whether there was any 
substance to that assurance."

But Wright did not mention the phone hacking of his own staff, which was 
itself suggestive that hacking went beyond Goodman, who was interested only in 
royal stories. In fact, the hacking involved both royal and non-royal stories.

It is understood that Wright cannot recall whether or not he informed Dacre 
about the hacking at the time. For his part, Dacre cannot recall whether he 
knew of it and therefore cannot remember whether or not he spoke about it to 
his PCC colleagues.

Two Mail group executives said they could not understand why the silence was 
considered to be strange. They both said the fact that five of the people named 
at the trial of Goodman and Mulcaire were non-royals showed that hacking went 
wider than Goodman's royal brief. Therefore, the hacking of their own staff was 
not of special significance.

They strenuously denied claims that Wright and Dacre had purposely withheld 
information, arguing that it was an inconsequential matter. The then PCC 
director, Tim Toulmin, is adamant that he was not informed by Dacre or Wright 
about the hacking of their staff's phones. He said: "I am clear that it wasn't 
mentioned. You telling me is the first I've heard of it."

It is broadly accepted that for the Mail on Sunday to have gone public in 2006 
about the hacking by Mulcaire might have prejudiced his trial. But once 
Mulcaire and Goodman were sentenced to jail in January 2007, the sub judice 
rules no longer applied and there was no reason for the story not to be 
published.

The three Mail on Sunday victims contacted by the Guardian – Rice, Collins and 
Hamilton – appear unsure why the truth did not emerge. One suggested that the 
Mail on Sunday and theNews of the World 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld> often made joint bids for 
stories and the Mail would not wished to have imperilled that relationship.

Another argued that the Mail editors were concerned not to add to what they 
considered to be an anti-popular journalism furore around the hacking scandal.

One former Mail on Sunday staffer, speaking on a confidential basis, said he 
was "not greatly surprised" that the paper managed to keep the lid on the 
truth. He said: "At the Mail, we were expected to keep quiet about things."
