
The Liberal Democrat politician David Rendel, who has died aged 67 after 
suffering from cancer, achieved the largest majority ever recorded by his party 
when he won the Newbury byelection in May 1993 by more than 22,055 votes. The 
Tory defeat in what had been one of the party’s safest seats for nearly a 
century came as a considerable shock to John Major’s government, and led 
directly to the defenestration of the then chancellor of the exchequer,Norman 
Lamont <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/norman-lamont>.

The party leadership had known the government was unpopular in the wake of the 
Maastricht treaty negotiations and the humiliating falling out of the European 
exchange rate mechanism on Black Wednesday the previous autumn, but the 29% 
swing against the Tories in west Berkshire came as a jolt from which Major’s 
government struggled to recover. It did not win another byelection.

Lamont, who had incautiously attempted a joke at a pre-election press 
conference, complacently echoing Edith Piaf in claiming “Je ne regrette rien” 
when asked about the government’s economic policy, lost his job within weeks. 
He had been staying at the family home of his special adviser,David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, for his visit to the 
constituency. Cameron himself had presciently decided not to stand in the 
byelection and the Tory candidate was a Somerset farmer named Julian Davidson. 
By the time he was elected, Rendel had already fought and lost four times at 
general elections, twice in Fulham, before moving to Newbury and losing twice 
there, the second a year before the byelection by more than 12,000 votes.

A tall, thin, and scholarly figure, he was the antithesis of a populist 
politician and as an Old Etonian and former Oxford rowing blue he was a 
distinct throwback to an earlier era in Liberal politics. But his family had 
deep Liberal roots – an ancestor had been an associate of Gladstone – and he 
had been and remained an astute, campaigning local politician.

Rendel was born in Athens, the son of Alexander Rendel, a foreign 
correspondent for the Times, and his wife, Elizabeth (nee Williams). He was a 
scholar at Eton, then spent a year as a teacher in Cameroon and Uganda with 
Voluntary Service Overseas before going on to study physics and philosophy at 
Magdalen College, Oxford, where he was a member of the university boat race 
winning crew in 1974. He then worked in the computing and finance departments 
of Shell, British Gas and Esso.

Rendel married Susan Taylor in 1974 and the couple moved to Newbury in 1986 
when she became a GP in the town. Within a year he was on the local district 
council and the Liberal party’s candidate (as part of the SDP-Liberal Alliance) 
in that year’s general election. He might never have won the constituency at 
all but for the sudden death following a routine operation in 1993 ofJudith 
Chaplin 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-judith-chaplin-1474547.html>
, a former adviser to Major, who had been parachuted into the safe seat at the 
general election the previous year.

Newbury accordingly became the first byelection after the Black Wednesday 
debacle and Rendel was able to make full use of his local knowledge as a 
campaigner and politician of clear integrity.

He secured more than 37,000 votes, 65% of the total and more than twice as 
many as the Tory candidate, helped by the complete collapse of the Labour vote. 
There were 19 candidates at the byelection (then a record), three of them 
anti-Maastricht Conservatives, beside the official candidate, as well as
Screaming Lord Sutch 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/jun/19/guardianobituaries.nigelfountain> 
and “Miss Whiplash” Lindi St Clair, among a host of other fringe 
exhibitionists. Having grown up locally, I covered the campaign for the 
Guardian: it was quite a circus. My father, a quiet anti-Tory, told me 
jubilantly the following day that it was the first time he had ever voted for a 
winning candidate.

In parliament, Rendel cut a slightly diffident figure. He served as the 
Liberal Democrat spokesman on local government (1993-97) and then higher 
education (2001-05), opposing student tuition and top-up fees and leading the 
fight against the Labour government’s plans to scrap single parent benefits and 
cut those for disabled people. He also served on the public accounts and 
procedures committees.

He came fifth when he stood for the leadership in 1999 after Paddy Ashdown 
stood down <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/1999/jan/21/liberaldemocrats.uk>
, losing out toCharles Kennedy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/02/charles-kennedy>. He was 
perhaps too solemn and reserved a figure for the leadership but he fought for 
the party to retain its distinctiveness, opposing Ashdown’s attempt to draw 
closer to Labour and, in 2010, as one of the Lib Dems’ federal executive 
committee, he was the only one to vote against going into coalition with the 
Tories.

Rendel may have lost some support when in the mid-1990s he backed the 
controversialNewbury bypass project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/24/newbury-protest-camp-bypass-legacy>
, which was fiercely opposed by environmentalists – though not by his 
constituents, tired of traffic congestion in the bottleneck town – and, 
conversely, when he voted for the fox hunting ban in 2004, opposing a pastime 
cherished by some local hunting and racing types in west Berkshire.

Rendel held the seat, with decreasing majorities, until the 2005 general 
election, when the Tories narrowly regained it with a candidate, Richard 
Benyon, whose family had been local landowners for several centuries. He lost a 
second time to Benyon, by 12,000 votes, at the 2010 election, and lost even 
more heavily last year when he stood for the party at Somerton and Frome in 
Somerset. He had continued to serve on West Berkshire district council after 
his parliamentary career, retiring in 2015.

He is survived by Susan and their three sons.

• David Digby Rendel, politician, born 15 April 1949; died 16 May 2016
