
I'm too vain to go on TV. I'd be a monster of self-consciousness. Plus, I've 
got a ridiculous voice - I sound like a camp friend of Bertie Wooster's. Being 
'natural' on TV is the most unnatural thing in the world. I get asked to go on 
certain Twit The Week-type panel shows to be the urbane, witty, rude one, or to 
be a Simon Cowell-type judge on Britain's Next Overblown Mediocrity. The truth 
is, to appear on TV is to be hated. I'm already hated.

I don't have prejudices against anybody. I have opinions, based on a 
lifetime's experience.

Everyone thinks they can be a critic, and they're wrong. I'll ask you about a 
film, and you'll say it was great, there was a guy who met a girl and her dad 
was an alien. That's not criticism, that's exposition. A critic will come out 
and say why did I or didn't I like that, and then start pulling it to bits. 
It's not really a natural reaction, but I think critics are important to 
civilisation in the same way that traffic wardens are important to traffic flow.

I generally only eat one meal a day, which is pretty unusual for a restaurant 
reviewer. It's not that I have a problem with food; I'll eat anything that 
doesn't involve a bet, a dare, or an initiation ceremony. I once found myself 
in Marrakech with Heston Blumenthal, and we ended up at a tiny stall eating 
cold, boiled udder.

I've often been accused of dressing too well. I've always been fascinated by 
fashion, though I don't think I'm particularly fashionable. It's the fourth or 
fifth biggest industry in the world, and it's run by people who you wouldn't 
trust to water your plants while you're away. Proper nutters.

The great truth about travel is Kipling's quote: 'Who knows England who only 
England knows?' Travel shows you where you've come from.

I was an alcoholic. I used to answer the phones for an ex-alcoholics 
fellowship, and it was easy to deal with the whining, angry, resentful drunks 
who called. The people who were most heartrending to talk to were the kids 
who'd phone and say, 'My dad's upstairs, trashing my room,' or wives who said, 
'He's come home, been sick, passed out, what do I do?' That made me realise how 
tough it must have been on my family.

I've finished with marriage. I've been married to two great women, and I'm in 
a great relationship now, but I'm not very good at being married. There are 
people who get married and become greater than the sum of their parts. Not me. 
I sort of shrivelled.

I quite like being hungry. I don't have that constant need to be sated. Some 
people eat on their emotions; the fridge is their psychiatrist. I'm the 
opposite. I don't need to eat if I'm worried, frightened, unhappy, or depressed.

I would recommend fatherhood at any time you could manage it. I had early 
babies and I've now got later babies, in my sixth decade. I've had a lot of men 
friends who go, 'Oh, how can you do the nappies and the late nights and the no 
holidays and the school fees and the 20-year nanny conversation stuff all over 
again?' And I'm, 'Well, what else are you going to spend your money on? How 
many more chrome bachelor-pad gizmos do you want?' Because have no doubts, 
these are all family substitutes.

I'm getting much more shockable. When I was 19, nothing shocked me. But there 
are now news stories I can't read, and stuff I can't watch on TV. I did a story 
in Iraq, and someone asked me if I'd seen the videos of hostages like Daniel 
Pearl being beheaded, and I said I hadn't. He said, 'Good. People will tell you 
that you need to see those things as a journalist, but there are things that 
you put in your head that you can't get rid of.' He's right. There is no 
click-and-drag to the recycle bin in your memory. I don't want to develop a 
1,000-yard-stare.

I make good money. But I'd do what I do for a pittance. Don't tell my 
employers.

• Paper View by AA Gill <http://www.theguardian.com/media/aa-gill> is 
published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson, £12.99
