
The government’s higher education white paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/523396/bis-16-265-success-as-a-knowledge-economy.pdf>
 – and the legislation that will follow – redraws three fundamental 
relationships that have defined higher education in the UK for 100 years: with 
the state, with students and with research.

The assumptions shaping each of these relationships have been taken for 
granted for many years, and were undoubtedly overdue for overhaul. Yet the 
laudable aim of the white paper to address these relationships and to create a 
more accessible, accountable and relevant higher education system also brings 
real dangers of unintended consequences.

Some universities could fail

Universities have long enjoyed benign government sponsorship through 
predictable and steadily-rising grant funding. They have had assured student 
numbers and protection from competition, within a regulatory regime that they 
have largely designed and operated for themselves.


However, the shift to funding through student tuition fees and the lifting of 
student quota controls has begun to expose universities to something 
approaching open market competition. The white paper extends this process, 
encouraging the entry of new and alternative higher education providers, and 
accepting that this could be at the expense of established institutions.

This is causing at least some universities to reexamine their offers and ways 
of working. But a significant number of institutions are already struggling to 
recruit enough students and cover their costs. The white paper makes clear that 
there will be no bail-outs for failing institutions, whose exit would be 
welcomed as a way of freeing up room in the market for more entrepreneurial and 
innovative new entrants.

This stance is based on faith that private providers, and the investors behind 
them, will rush to fill any void left by failed traditional institutions. The 
reality is that the struggling institutions are most likely to be found in 
socially deprived areas, and to have focused on recruiting among disadvantaged 
populations, with courses heavily geared to lower-paid occupations in 
healthcare and public services.

By contrast, private providers have concentrated on what their critics would 
call cherry-picking; focusing on courses in business and professional studies 
leading to high-paying careers for home and international students in London 
and other prosperous locations.

This will make it hard to reconcile the government’s ambitions for improved 
opportunities for disadvantaged students with the forces of sink-or-swim 
provider competition.

The Tef will be misleading

The white paper seeks to empower students as paying consumers of higher 
education services and pressure universities to enhance the quality and value 
of those services. The principal vehicle for this will be the much-anticipated 
Teaching Excellence Framework (Tef).

The intentions driving these reforms are good. Despite numerous attempts to 
improve the transparency and accountability of universities’ deal with 
students, the system remains heavily weighted towards academic paternalism and 
institutional bureaucracies. There is also a grain of truth in ministerial 
assertions that student interests are too often subordinated to staff 
preoccupations with research and personal agendas.

The problem is that the new approach risks homogenising and oversimplifying 
the diversity and complexities of higher education and learning. The great 
strength of the higher education system has always been the diversity of 
opportunities that it provides. The very nature of higher education varies 
hugely between disciplines, from intensive lab-based science projects to 
one-on-one tutoring for aspiring artists and musicians. This diversity cannot 
be captured by standardised metrics, and we must hope that the new Office for 
Students will be enabled to supplement the Tef with more nuanced judgements of 
quality.

Universities could ditch research

The third key reform in the white paper is to uncouple the link between higher 
education teaching and research. Almost every university claims that research 
is central to its mission, and puts research aspirations at the heart of 
institutional strategies. Even though research income represents only a small 
part of for most universities’ revenues, all would claim that their research 
culture and capabilities are crucial.


In many ways, these reforms simply extend a process that has been unfolding 
for some years, as research funding has become concentrated among a small 
number of Russell Group universities and policy has increasingly focused on 
major national centres like the Crick Institute and the Joint European Torus. 
Nonetheless, the implications are significant. The prospect of teaching-only 
universities, still regarded by many academics as an oxymoron, will become a 
real prospect as will the emergence of research-only institutions along the 
lines of the German Fraunhofer Institutes.

These changes, if they happen – and the white paper makes them quite likely – 
will differentiate the UK higher education system from every other system in 
the world. But the implications, for students and universities, remain to be 
seen.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
