
I just read The Maltese Falcon for the first time, and this whole detective 
story thing looks pretty easy. First, invent a crime. Then narrate it in a 
confusing way, having your characters all mislead each other. Then reveal 
everything, and become eternally famous for your genre-bending mastery.

First, inventing our crime: a guy goes into a henhouse and steals the 
chickens. What's his motive? He's hungry. Why is he so hungry? He has no money. 
Why no money? He's a bum. Why is he a bum? He just is.

Second, obfuscation: a femme fatale comes into our detective's office, a kind 
of farmerish femme fatale, wearing those short-shorts Jessica Simpson wears. 
She slinks in, drops the shorts... hang on, wrong genre. She slinks in - here 
the obfuscation starts - and claims that someone has stolen her pick-up truck. 
She's lying, to use the detective for her nefarious ends. Later, we find she's 
in league with the chicken-stealer, whom she met in Istanbul - no, wait, she is 
the chicken-stealer! Yes, that's it: that guy who stole the chickens? Was her, 
in... in a male bodysuit. And a fake moustache. With a fake male sexual organ 
under her shorts. What was her motive? Well, those are her chickens. Right: she 
is trying, by stealing her own chickens, to get some attention from her 
neglectful husband, Vern.

Now, if I were a detective, or a marriage counsellor, my advice would be: wear 
those shorts next time you make dinner, that'll get his attention. But no: Vern 
is gay. Or blind. Or both. Yes: he is a gay blind man, and the only way she can 
get his attention is... you see, Vern, though gay and blind, loves chickens. He 
thinks they speak to him. He is, sadly, compiling a book of chicken diction, 
really just one crazy...

So: our heroine, disguised as a man, stole her own chickens, and is now 
claiming that someone stole her pick-up, to win back the love of a blind, gay 
guy who thinks he can speak chicken. Vern is, in fact, in love with one of his 
male chickens, a really fat one who looks like Sydney Greenstreet, but with 
feathers. She plans to pretend to find the chickens, then return them to Vern, 
at which time, due to the shock, Vern's eyesight will be restored and he'll 
suddenly go straight. (This will be a big seller among the religious right.)

But wait: one more twist. She's forgotten to remove the fake male organ from 
her shorts, and there are a few feathers on her shoulder from the heist, and 
lately she's put on a few pounds, so Vern, on acid, hallucinates that she is 
Sydney Greenstreet...

Slow dissolve. A wisp of smoke. Our detective and his assistant sit in his 
darkened office, eating Kentucky Fried Chicken.
