
What do my pet rats say about me?

“They say I’m caring. Rats are the ideal pet for me, as they fit around my 
life and are always happy to see me.”

And what they really say

In this aesthetic age of hipster kittens and cute cockapoos, when pets are 
ranked according to their Instagram-appropriateness, some of us feel that rats 
are not getting their due. Rats might not look sweet in a teacup or a knitted 
tutu, but they make great pets: they’re super-friendly, very clever and like to 
scrabble around in your jumper before popping up at your neck, like a wriggly 
scarf. I know this because, when I was 20, I had a pet rat. I called him Barney 
after the lead singer of New Order. Barney died in unfortunate circumstances 
(another story), but he was proper fun while he lasted.

Anyway. Donna is a rat breeder, a woman who understands rats. She is clearly 
happy to hold them, fine about them rootling in her hair (rats love walking 
over your head). I have no doubt she enjoys chasing them around the sofa. Donna 
has made nice big cages for her rats, but they’ll still need exercise. Rats 
like to look around, though they won’t run across rooms. They’ve been hunted 
for too long; they stick to the edges.

Rats are curious, and you can easily take one on a trip. You just hide it in 
your coat. I once took Barney to McDonald’s, but we were thrown out for being 
vermin (the cheek!). I didn’t mind: I could never get through a bag of chips 
without Barney swiping at least half of them. Rats are ultra-quick thieves, 
ninja nickers.

Judging by her clothes, Donna is not a goth (rats are a goth clubcard in 
animal form), so we can say her rats show that she is kind and caring, and that 
she looks beyond the obvious. She knows that appearances don’t matter as much 
as affection. She and her rats look happy, just as cute as can be.


If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
