
I’ve always struggled socially but even now, as a 23-year-old man, I feel 
under so much pressure not just from my parents, but from everyone else to be 
“better” around others and just be more “normal”.

It has been said many times over the years that I appear to fit the autistic 
spectrum (not proven, however) and maybe that was the reason I couldn’t hack it 
at university, barely lasting a week before leaving.

I am in work though and earning a little, paying my share of things including 
helping with the mortgage payments every now and then, but I get the feeling 
that that isn’t enough. I’m not in a relationship – never have been, to be 
blunt – and have never felt that way about anyone. Is that my fault? Probably, 
but it doesn’t help that I hear my parents chatting among themselves that they 
wish I’d at least be looking for someone; show an interest, something ...

It’s not just that, though. They want me to go out and socialise but I don’t 
at all. I go to work, come home and stay there. I don’t have any friends other 
than my best friend, who I’ve known since I was six, but he’s at university and 
I haven’t seen him for nearly four years now, although we message online from 
time to time. Socialising has always been a struggle and now it’s coming to a 
point where I wonder what I can do. I struggle to trust people and that stemmed 
from the bullying I suffered throughout my school days and that lack of 
trusting is really starting to get to me.

In a way I do fear going outside. Obviously I have to go out to go to work, 
but stay inside the rest of the time, even when I’m off work. I don’t feel 
comfortable outside the home and it’s there that the pressure heaps on me. My 
parents want me to go out but I don’t feel like I can. Quitting university was 
the lowest I’ve ever felt and I don’t know if I’ve ever recovered from it – 
that was over four years ago.

I portray that I’m OK to the outside world but deep down I’m struggling most 
days. I feel low a lot of the time, watching TV and playing on the Sims to take 
my mind off things. I understand why my parents want me to be with someone, 
show an interest or go out and socialise, but it’s a pressure I cannot cope 
with. I’m on a low that I don’t think I can get out of.

It’s amazing that you’ve got in touch, that’s a real positive, as is the fact 
that you work.

I don’t think there’s anything wrong with being an introvert: they are as much 
part of the world as extroverts, who seem to get all the praise and all the 
social badges. I wonder how much of this is that you are unhappy – I note you 
said you are low – or are you basically OK but unhappy because everyone else 
thinks you should conform to some idea of what a 23-year-old should be doing, 
and that is what is making you feel wretched? Where do you feel most yourself? 
What makes you feel like you?

You may be autistic. I don’t know: sure, some of the things you say in your 
letter could hint at it, or they may be signs that you are depressed. Or both. 
What do you think? Do you feel you are autistic?

Have you ever tried to see anyone about how you feel? About possible autism 
and maybe your depression?

I’ve listed some links below to various autistic sites/resources that you can 
have a look at and see if any chime with you. Resources around the country are 
patchy (and you don’t say where you live) and I don’t want to insist you get a 
diagnosis unless you really want to, because even then you may not get one. 
That doesn’t change who you are. A diagnosis is really helpful for some people 
and not so much for others.

So, I don’t want to – can’t – label you, but you may find it useful to read up 
on autism a bit more. I have known lots of people who have struggled with 
bullying/university/life/socialising in general and they haven’t been autistic. 
That said, those with autism can find these things especially challenging.

Have you ever tried to see anyone about how you feel? About possible autism 
and maybe your depression? What about your GP? I know some can be great and 
some awful and as I said, resources are so varied. But if you haven’t been, 
it’s something you may want to consider.

Have you looked into local sources of counselling? Your GP may be able to 
refer you (there will probably be a waiting list). I have put some further 
links at the bottom of the column, which may help you.

I spoke to Caroline Hearst, an autism awareness consultant who edited the book 
Being Autistic. She thought you might benefit from looking into things such as 
AutScape (see below), which is an annual conference run for and by autistic 
people.

Please remember that there are many different types of “normal”.

Useful links and further reading:

Autscape.org <http://www.autscape.org/>
Autism Matters <http://www.autismmatters.org.uk/> (a site run by Caroline 
Hearst), which has a list of further resources at
autismmatters.org.uk/resources.html 
<http://www.autismmatters.org.uk/resources.html>
Neurotribes <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/382029/> 
by Steve Silberman
The National Autistic Society (autism.org.uk <http://www.autism.org.uk/>) has 
some great resources as well as online forums.
UKCP.org.uk <http://www.ukcp.org.uk/>
Bacp.co.uk <http://www.bacp.co.uk/>

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
