
Everyone thinks that Einstein was so smart. Let's examine this. What was his 
big contribution? Everyone knows that: the theory of relativity. This theory 
states that, when moving near the speed of light, everything is related. For 
example: say your uncle is moving at the speed of light. Then he is also my 
uncle. Also, our uncle, moving faster than the speed of light, becomes smaller 
and goes slightly back in time, to the moment just before he accelerated past 
the speed of light, at which time he goes back to his regular size. This can be 
a good or a bad thing, depending on the original size of one's uncle.

The other theory Einstein developed was Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle, 
which stated that Einstein felt unsure about Heisenberg. Heisenberg responded 
with his famous Einstein's Annoying Theory, which stated that Heisenberg found 
Einstein hard to take. Some believe their dispute originated when Einstein 
tricked Heisenberg into travelling faster than the speed of light, thus 
decreasing Heisenberg's mass - and Heisenberg was already quite small. After 
Heisenberg came back from travelling at the speed of light, Einstein could hold 
him in one hand. And often did, to Heisenberg's consternation, causing Einstein 
to formulate his Heisenberg's Consternated Theorum. But history proved Einstein 
wrong, since there is no such word as "consternated".

The idea that mass decreases as one approaches the speed of light is 
compelling, especially for dieters. It implies that one way to lose weight is 
to run, briefly, at the speed of light. As stated above, the downside is one 
will also go back in time. So you'll be lighter, but may find yourself in the 
1400s, when everyone was lighter, due to malnutrition, and no one will even 
notice you've lost weight. Also, due to your modern clothes, you'll probably be 
declared a witch and burned at the stake. On the bright side, post-burning, 
you'll achieve your lowest body weight.

Einstein once explained relativity like this: "If you're sitting on a hot 
stove for even a minute, it will seem like an eternity; but if you're sitting 
on a hot stove with a pretty girl, your ass will burst into flames and not a 
girl in the world will seem pretty. Trust me, I've tried it."

Part of Einstein's mystique was his tendency to wander around completely lost, 
hair sticking up, playing the violin. Heisenberg tried this but was too small, 
well-organised and balding, so ended up with neat hair, dragging his violin 
behind him, sure where he was. And hence Einstein is remembered as the greater 
genius.
