
Losing your job is rarely pleasant, but simultaneously losing your employment, 
your cultural traditions and a way of life that supports whole communities is a 
worse redundancy package than most. For hundreds of thousands of Indian silk 
weavers, this is a reality which has seen the jobless forced into such 
desperate measures as selling their blood or even their own children to make 
ends meet. Death from starvation is common, although many take their own lives 
first.

It is only just dawn in Varanasi, one of Hinduism's holiest cities, but the 
street corners and marketplaces are already teeming with people. Among them is 
Bhaiya Maurya, but he has not come here to admire the ancient temples that rise 
from the banks of the Ganges. He has come here, like everyone else, to look for 
work - any work. Over the next hour, trucks will come and collect labourers. If 
Bhaiya is chosen he'll make 75 rupees today, less than £1, and he will consider 
himself lucky. Two days out of three his luck is out and he'll go home 
empty-handed. Across the globe, recession is making countries fear the spectre 
of mass unemployment. Here in Uttar Pradesh, India's northern and most populous 
state, there are more than three times as many mouths to feed as in the UK. The 
numbers out of work are staggering and the threads that bind them together are 
made of silk.

Waiting at home in the village of Damodarpur 15 km from Varanasi is Bhaiya's 
father, Hari. He is a master weaver who in the past decade has seen falling 
demand, rising costs and increased foreign competition decimate the silk trade. 
At its peak, it employed a million people in this area. Now, it employs less 
than half that number. As Hari explains: "A few years ago, everyone in my 
village was engaged in hand-weaving. Now, most people are unemployed. If 
everyone had work, then the village would develop automatically. First we need 
jobs, and only then will come safe water, electricity and roads."

There is debate over whether the jobs they so urgently need can come from the 
labour-intensive hand-weaving sector, as they have in the past. The Indian 
prime minister, Manmohan Singh might have been thinking of the silk weavers of 
Varanasi when he told the G20 recently that he would resist the "inevitable 
pressures" for protectionism caused by "low growth and high unemployment". The 
struggles of this industry are the familiar problems that increased 
mechanisation and globalisation can bring. Traditional hand-woven saris simply 
cannot compete on cost with machine-made garments from China.

Falling demand is also a symptom of cultural change. Fashions are changing 
across the subcontinent and Indian communities worldwide. Young girls are less 
likely than their mothers to wear saris. When they do, they want lighter, 
tighter designs, not the heavy, gold-and-silver-embroidered Banarasi sari of 
antiquity.

However, this weight of history and tradition may turn out to be the 
hand-weavers' greatest asset. The Banarasi sari is famous throughout India and 
traditionally every Hindu bride will wear one on her wedding day. Weavers such 
as Hari are the only ones skilled to make it authentically, having passed the 
knowledge down from generation to generation. Ashok Kapoor, a trader who has 
worked to help preserve hand-weaving, sums up his concerns bluntly. "I don't 
care about the starving weavers," he tells me. "I care that the art is dying."

Four and a half thousand miles away, in Whitechapel, London, there is evidence 
of what British politicians might call "green shoots of recovery". The Banarasi 
sari remains a marketable brand. Imported saris sell for about £250, but even 
within India it can be difficult to be sure that what is sold as a Banarasi 
sari has actually originated in Varanasi. That is now changing. Realising that 
substandard imitations were damaging their reputation, and sales, the weavers 
have organised a co-operative, Banaras Bunkar Samiti (BBS). They now negotiate 
with traders as a group and, with support from the development agency Find Your 
Feet, they have managed to persuade the government to introduce a patent for 
Varanasi's saris. This protects their product in the same way as champagne or 
Darjeeling tea. KP Verma, the assistant director of the state government's 
handloom department assures me that this will have a transformative effect on 
the lives of the weavers, but Hari is wary. He is quick to point out that any 
success the patent has will rely on demand from relatively wealthy consumers 
who are prepared to follow the lead of Banarasi fans such as Bollywood's 
Aishwarya Rai and pay a premium for luxury. Traders and exporters such as 
Maqbool Hasan concede that while there is still demand for genuine Banarasi 
silk from Indian elites, many buyers, including the large export markets of 
America and Europe, care only about price.

The only thing that will revive the hand-weaving industry is co-operation. As 
well as lobbying the government, BBS have also formed microcredit groups to 
help the weavers back on their feet. A loan from the co-operative enabled Hari 
to reopen the loom he calls "the symbol of my pride". It is now the only one in 
his village, where once there were 200, but it is a start. With help from 
Bhaiya's younger brother, Krishna, Hari has diversified from saris into a wider 
range of garments and home furnishings targeted at India's growing middle 
class. Meanwhile another son, Raju, was supported by a BBS loan to learn 
computerised embroidery. He is now one of the few villagers to earn a salary.

However, at a meeting of the microcredit group there is acknowledgement that 
silk is now too fragile a trade to support the weight of this community on its 
own. Former weavers are encouraged to embrace an entrepreneurial spirit. Recent 
loans have been used to buy buffaloes, which are popular for their milk, or to 
establish shops and develop agriculture. The treasurer, Nirmala, tells me: 
"Each house used to have looms and every house used to weave, but now we would 
die if we stuck to that profession only."

 Having started out with little and lost much, the first task for these 
communities is creating new opportunities. Hari is a man of quiet dignity. He 
does not ask for charity. He wants only the opportunity to work himself and his 
family out of their situation.

As he says: "The most important thing in the definition of development is 
jobs. Work is essential for each and every hand."
