
In fashion, as in food, best-before dates as proclaimed by the manufacturer 
should be neither slavishly followed nor wilfully ignored, but instead viewed 
through the prism of your own considered judgment. As a rule, the flashy stuff 
goes off more quickly. You don’t want to risk 10-day-old prawns; by the same 
token, the headline-grabbing must-have pieces fall hard when they fall. (I’m 
thinking of thoseIsabel Marant wedge-heeled hi-top trainers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/dec/28/what-we-liked-2013-fashion-isabel-marant>
 that spawned a million copies and that everyone wore, me included: they’re now 
unacceptable in polite society.)

But most cases are less black and white. If the yoghurt in the fridge is a few 
days past the date on the top but smells fine, I’d eat it, but I wouldn’t give 
it to kids or guests. The same goes for fashion trends. If practicality or 
speed demands, I can survive a day in a outfit that is curling around the edges 
without my self-esteem crumbling. But some people are sensitive to the merest 
whiff of style that’s anything less than box-fresh, and I would not wish to 
offend such delicate sensibilities, so I take my diary into account.

Consider the case of knee-high boots when worn with an above-the-knee skirt. 
For a long while, this was one of those outfits that was ubiquitous. It just 
worked: it was flattering, and looked smart and current. But having slid into 
fashion under the radar, it slid quietly out again. A bit like those jars of 
spices you don’t think of as having a best-before date, until you notice that 
the Szechuan peppercorns expired in 2008 and your life flashes before you. My 
point is, you have been doing the boots-tights-above-the-knee-skirt look longer 
than you think. No one will shriek with horror, but some may wrinkle their 
noses.

Related: Brooklyn Beckham, Burberry and the new celebrity aristocracy 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/01/brooklyn-beckham-burberry-celebrity-artistocracy-16-photography-snobbery-instagram-followers>

It’s knees that are the problem. Not yours, specifically – I mean all knees. 
Your skirt needs to be long enough to meet the top of your boots. It’s a 
counter-intuitive update, because it feels more old-fashioned, but it works. 
Fashion needs fresh ingredients, too.

• Jess wears sleeveless jumper, £100, by Michael Michael Kors, from 
harveynichols.com <http://www.harveynichols.com>. Vintage suede skirt, 
stylist’s own.Boots, £135, office.co.uk <http://www.office.co.uk>.

Stylist: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Laurence Close at Carol Hayes 
Management.
