
The Guardian defines an academy as “independent of local authorities” (Plan to 
turn all schools into academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/15/osborne-chancellor-focus-budget-schools-reform-academies>
, 16 March). The proper definition is contained in the Education Act 2002. 
Section 65 defines an academy as a school created by the secretary of state, 
“under an agreement with any person” who undertakes to “carry on” a school of a 
certain kind. A school created by and wholly dependent for its existence on a 
funding contract with a government minister is, in plain English, a government 
school. That is an academy’s defining characteristic. If all schools in England 
become government schools, the English school system will have been 
nationalised. Is that what anyone in England has ever been invited to vote for? 
In 1944, towards the end of a war against a dictatorship, in The Road to 
Serfdom, Hayek wrote: “Nowhere has democracy ever worked well without a great 
measure of local self government.” That remains true. It is democracy itself 
that is now under attack. For the first time since 1870, locally elected people 
are to be excluded from oversight of schools in their area. In their place are 
to be persons, elected by no one, appointed by and accountable to an individual 
government minister. Who still remembers that this country fought a war against 
that form of government?
Peter Newsam
Thornton Dale, North Yorkshire

• Across the country about 14,000 primary schools are to lose the current 
support (not control) of local authorities and possibly the professional 
support provided by their local family of schools. The chancellor says he will 
“set schools free from the shackles of local bureaucracy”. Nonsense. Local 
authorities do not tell schools what to do but provide a range of services – 
financial, insurance, safety, technical and ICT, among others, as well as a 
local inspectorate that is usually more supportive than Ofsted. All of this is 
to be discarded, to be taken over by chains of academy trusts that will often 
be remote from local communities and unapproachable by parents. Why? “To raise 
standards,” says the chancellor. But theOfsted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> evidence is that many of the 
trusts show “the same weaknesses as the worst-performing local authorities”. 
And some of them are laying down strict rules for their schools that look like 
“shackles of bureaucracy”.

Is this a smoke screen to obscure austerity measures in the budget?
Emeritus professor Michael Bassey
Newark, Nottinghamshire

• The opportunity to be an academy has been of great value to our schools and 
has allowed us a level of innovation and creativity we would otherwise not have 
reached. As a result we have developed a confidence and independence that is 
invigorating and a pleasure to be a part of. But essential to our success was 
our original motivation. By choosing to convert to an academy and creating a 
multi-academy trust we were taking control of our own future. For schools who 
find themselves in the position of responding to the stick rather than the 
carrot, they will need to identify the opportunities to take control and create 
their own futures.

While the latest government proposal may be limiting schools’ choices, it is 
important to recognise there are still important choices to be made and taking 
control of the agenda at this point is an essential next step for schools. 
Multi-academy trusts (MATs) are unique and individual; schools must identify 
what they are looking for in their future partnerships and set out to find it. 
Rather like an arranged marriage, not every school will be lucky enough to have 
met the perfect partner but they must at least be confident that over time they 
will be able to build a secure, trusted relationship. MATs must make clear what 
they are offering schools and schools must know what they are looking for. The 
right MAT is out there for every school but we’ve all got to be willing to put 
a bit of effort into our courting.
Amanda Godfrey
Executive head, Spiral Partnership Trust (MAT), Mandeville primary school

• We’re concerned that the government’s focus on all schools becoming 
academies and extending the school day could be missing the point. Regardless 
of whether a school is run by the local authority or the head, the focus must 
be on providing the vital skills young people need for the world of work. The 
rebalancing of our economy away from financial services and towards engineering 
and technology is being undermined by the lack of engineering and technology 
education in the curriculum. There is a huge shortage of engineers, so it is 
vital that young people are aware of the wide range of exciting careers in 
engineering and technology. Currently over half of employers say that new 
engineering recruits do not have the right skills and many are not aware of the 
exciting range of careers in engineering and technology.

If the school day is to be lengthened, we should be giving students more of an 
opportunity to do science and engineering-related activities. The government 
should look at mandatory work experience for young people to help equip them 
with relevant, practical experience. It’s important that schools work with 
local businesses to create these opportunities.

There needs to be a much bigger emphasis on the application of engineering and 
technology in the curriculum – through design and technology and the practical 
application of maths and physics. Without this many young people are 
effectively slamming the door on a career in engineering.
Alison Carr
Director of policy, Institution of Engineering and Technology

• The plans to convert all schools to academies are not based on their 
performance records, which are very mixed, but on a desire to remove local 
authority control and ultimately national pay bargaining. There is already a 
shortage of teachers and this will inevitably become worse.
David Prothero
Harlington, Bedfordshire

• It’s telling that the academisation of every primary and secondary school is 
seen as a budgetary matter as opposed to educational. However, there is no 
mention of admissions, attendance, special needs, looked-after children, pupil 
referral services and land ownership? Presumably these issues will remain in 
the hands of local authority “bureaucrats”.
Toby Wood
Peterborough, Cambridgeshire

• When is a political party going to be courageous enough to stop using 
education results as a political football. We have so few children happy at 
school so we are going to make them spend more time there. Politicians should 
ignore meaningless Pisa results (US and UK both score badly yet have the best 
universities), and instead look at the educational backgrounds of our greatest 
innovators and entrepreneurs. Once we take away those who inherited wealth, 
those left are an amazing bunch. The industrial revolution was not created by 
men who were public school or university educated and modern day wealth-makers 
largely reflect a similar background. Allow schools to teach to children’s 
strengths.
Heather Bodden
Wakefield, West Yorkshire

• Only the day after Peter Maxwell Davies’ obituary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/14/composer-peter-maxwell-davies-dies-aged-81>
, you report that the government is set to remove schools from LEA control, 
thus threatening their continued viability. Maxwell Davies’ musical education 
was nurtured by a Lancashire county music scholarship that enabled him to study 
at Manchester University and the Royal Manchester College of Music. Without 
education authority support it will be well nigh impossible for any but those 
of the most privileged backgrounds to pursue a serious musical career.
Austen Lynch
Garstang, Lancashire

• The government’s plan to turn all schools into academies suggests it has 
reached the same conclusion as Macbeth: “I am in blood stepped so far that, 
should I wade no more, returning were as tedious as go over.”
Steve Loveman
Sheffield

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
