
In my memory, I dealt with the situation incredibly well. I sprang up from my 
bed, opened the door, ushered the people sleeping outside under tents into the 
safety of our small brick bedroom and calmly waited for the bullets to stop 
hissing past my ears.


In reality, it was slightly different. I woke up, probably slower than I 
should have because the incident was similar to a dream I had been having for 
several nights. It took me some time to distinguish the reality from the haze 
of my imagination. Finally realising that we were being shot at, my first 
intuition was to put on my trainers so I would be able to run. I jumped up, 
reached for a shoe on the floor, flung it onto my foot, and then a thought came 
to my mind: “If you’re going to have to run, you should definitely put a bra 
on.”


Related: Secret aid worker: there is a new trend of sexual violence in South 
Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/oct/20/secret-aid-worker-south-sudan-personal-attacks>

When you think you are being attacked, your body and mind go into a sustained 
adrenaline state that you rarely experience. You begin to shake – and not just 
a little. You shake so much that your hands are rendered obsolete. You feel 
sick, but it feels like the sickness is coming from your chest rather than your 
stomach. Somehow though, your mind becomes incredibly clear with one thought 
consuming you – “I have to survive this any way I can”.

I was considering running into the darkness. Thank god my hands were shaking 
so much I couldn’t get my bra clasp done up (and therefore under no 
circumstances would be able to run at full speed), because if I had decided to 
run, I would have most likely been shot. During a time of incredible tension in
South Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-sudan>, I was part of a 
team that was responding to an emergency incident and as soon as we got there 
we were nervous about the security situation.


During the day, the place looking like a central African paradise, but night 
time was a different story. Three weeks earlier the entire population of the 
town had fled into the bush, escaping a gang that came to loot and pillage the 
community. Relative calm had ensued, but it still meant everything could change 
in the space of a minute. The local chief reassured us that “we are very safe 
here, no problems at all”, chuckling as his big belly bounced up and down, 
seemingly nodding in agreement. “Marvellous,” I said as I eyed one of his 
guards, a child no more than 15 years old clutching an AK-47.

A few days later, in what has to be the most farcical logic, a gang of local 
bandits came to the village to procure some bullets for their flailing stocks. 
Their technique was to shoot (just to clarify – shoot bullets, the very thing 
they were searching for) at the local police station, until they obtained more 
bullets. I’m really not sure what they were hoping for, maybe to catch the 
bullets the police fired back at them?

The gang shot at the police station in the dead of night. The police, taken by 
surprise, took shelter behind the NGO compound and returned fire. Thanks guys. 
The shooting lasted about five minutes. Sounds cute, just five minutes, but I 
promise that it is a very long five minutes when you have one shoe on, one bra 
cup balanced on your left shoulder, and are trying to cover your head while 
texting your partner to say, “Being shot at. Love you. Find someone better. Hid 
100 quid under sofa in case banks collapse again”.

Related: Secret aid worker: your stories of mental health, PTSD and burnout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/secret-aid-worker-mental-health-ptsd-and-burnout>

The shooting stopped and we sat there in silence. One of the NGO workers who 
had been sleeping outside in a tent had had a tough time of it. He had crawled 
inside our bedroom as I watched a bullet whizz over his head and take a chunk 
out of the wall. Given that at the time we had no idea who was shooting at what 
very much felt like us, the following four hours until daylight were nauseating.

We woke up in the morning and it all felt like paradise again, soft yellow 
light, birds singing gaily, but as I approached the gate of our compound to 
assess what had happened, I saw two bodies on the floor in front of me. For a 
second time that month, the community packed their bags and walked in the same 
direction that a few hours earlier I thought I would be running in.

That was almost six months ago, and while in the NGO world, admitting fear 
feels slightly indulgent given the terror that many people endure every day in 
South Sudan, the event shook me a little. You hear a lot about the medical aid 
provided for the vulnerable populations around the world, but so little 
attention is given to the psychological scars of these people who have only 
ever lived in a world of insecurity. I got a glimpse of what it would feel like 
to be indiscriminately shot because of “wrong place, wrong time”, and it was 
terrifying. For far too many people living in South Sudan, this is the reality 
of their everyday lives.


Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here’sinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
