
If you watched this week’s Great British Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/28/great-british-bake-off-iain-watters-baked-alaska>
, you’ll already be aware of the outrage directed at “Dirty Diana” for 
supposedly sabotaging rival contestant Iain’s Baked Alaska. You’ll also have 
noticed the praise directed at Iain for “taking one for the team” and going 
home rather than pointing the finger at his fellow baker. Diana meanwhile,
briefly lived on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/28/diana-beard-quit-bake-off-smell-taste>
 to bake another biscuit, prompting Twitter to explode in horror at her lack of 
team spirit.

Now obviously, I would never try to condone the deliberate termination of a 
promising frozen dessert. But I do think that sometimes, to be honest, teamwork 
is a little overrated - particularly when it comes to the business world.

Let me explain. Cast your mind back to your last “motivational” meeting. You 
know the kind I’m talking about. The ones that are always scheduled on the days 
when you have a million things on your to-do list, and really, really want to 
leave the office on time. Everyone shares ideas. No idea is a bad idea (except 
the ones that are met with an awkward silence and don’t get written on the 
whiteboard.) Everyone has a chance to air their grievances, suggest ways to 
make life better in the office and take on “fun” group projects to “raise their 
company profile”. Finally, everyone is sent on their way, feeling happier, more 
supported and terribly productive. After all, there’s no “I” in team.

Well, the thing is, there is an “I” in “Lottie”. And after years of farming 
out the same cliches at every job interview, I have finally removed the words 
“great team player” from my CV, along with the unequivocal lie that I enjoy 
playing tennis.

Talented people pooling their relative strengths can create something 
wonderful, but the business world’s version of “teamwork” in your average 
office has morphed into a procrastinating, political, time-wasting nightmare. 
Yes, when it comes to the workplace, it’s finally time to admit that I am not a 
team player.

I don’t dislike people in general. I happen to be pretty adept at smalltalk, 
very sociable and have even been known to crack the odd joke. It’s the enforced 
buddying up of the office team that winds me up. When I went freelance, the 
insecurity was nerve-wracking, but I immediately loved it. After a few weeks I 
worked out what it was: I was being paid to do a job, and judged pretty much 
solely on how well I had done it. There was no “running a few things past” 
various managers, wasting time trying to get past an insurmountable personality 
clash, or discussing every decision 10 times over.

For some people, teamwork can provide the kind of support that boosts 
confidence and brings out the best possible performance. For others, however, 
it creates the kind of co-dependency that can hold you back on decision-making 
until you’ve consulted every member of your team, assessed their relative views 
and made an informed choice. The wrong kind of teamwork can make you lazy and 
teach you not to trust your own instincts. It can also breed resentment: it’s 
very difficult to smile graciously when you’ve single-handedly made something 
happen and have to sit through endless praise for the “wonderful team effort”.

So, before I completely screw up any chance of ever being employed by anyone 
again, let me say a few words in defence of myself and my fellow non-team 
players. A non-team player is single minded and focused. They get the job done 
(usually about four times faster than those who have been sat in a circle 
discussing it for the past half hour) and will happily take on feedback and 
criticism as they’re not overly bothered by other people’s perceptions of them.

Above all, I think one of the best pieces of career advice I’ve ever had is to 
play to your own strengths and not try to be someone you’re not. If you’re 
terrible with numbers but continue to pursue a career in finance, you’re going 
to end up frustrated, stressed and probably unemployed. If, to be honest, those 
endless team meetings make you want to drown yourself in the watercooler, then 
maybe it’s time to have a quiet word with your boss about an idea or project 
that you can pursue solo – preferably on the opposite side of the office from 
anyone who’s going to tell you that “the team is behind you, 110%”.
