
The great mass of Thornbridge Hall rises like a dreadnought from the 
surrounding trees. Longhorn cattle graze in the fields on either side of the 
drive. This is not the first place you'd think of looking for a brewery from 
which gurgles forth award-winning beers. But Jim Harrison, proprietor of 
Thornbridge Hall and Thornbridge Hall Brewery, is merely recreating an old 
tradition among country houses, when the lords and masters of our countryside 
used to brew on the premises to quench the parched throats of family, guests 
and estate workers (and, incidentally, watering down the beer as it went down 
the social scale).

Not that Jim started off life as a brewer. It is doubtful he could have bought 
Thornbridge Hall, let alone restore it and its gardens to their present glory, 
if he had been. No, Jim has a business making gaskets in Barnsley. Not very 
romantic things, gaskets. But there must be money in them. And in pickles, too, 
because a few years back Jim got into making pickles - Cunningham's Piccalilli. 
"Cunningham's is one of the iconic Yorkshire brands."

So there's gaskets and pickles and a derelict mansion and longhorn cattle, not 
to mention a high-flying wife and four children. So where does beer fit into 
all this? "I started the brewery about three years ago," Jim says, "on the 
inspiration of a guy called Dave Wicketts of Kelham Island Brewery. I got some 
beer off him for a party one day, and it was so good I decided I'd like to make 
my own. But I made one crucial decision from the very beginning - I was not 
going to brew the beer myself. My philosophy in business is let them get on 
with it without me."

It's a philosophy that hasn't served Jim badly. He got his old business 
partner, Simon Webster, to run the business side of the brewery and hired an 
Italian, Stefano Cossi, to be his head brewer. Italian brewer? "We advertised 
for brewers when we started," Jim says, "and Stefano applied. He had a degree 
in food science in Italy and had been working in the brewery at Sheffield 
University."

Jim then let Simon, Stefano and the rest of the team get on with the job, 
installing the cold liquor tank, hot liquor tank, mash tub, kettle, fermenting 
vessels and all the rest in a barn behind the house, and they began brewing the 
beer. That was three years ago. Since then, the combination of Yorkshire nous 
and Italian flair has produced remarkable results. According to Jim, when Dave 
Wicketts first tasted Stefano's IPA, Jaipur, "he nearly cried. He said, 'Boys, 
this is only the third beer you've ever made, and it's the kind of beer that 
wins prizes.'"

And it has. Business hasn't been bad, either, and now they are at bursting 
point supplying local pubs and off-licences. "We produce 360 gallons at a time, 
and now we need a brewery three times the size of this one. And I'll stick a 
bottling line at the end of it." That's so they can control the quality 
throughout. He's a bit of a stickler for quality control is Jim, and he's not 
always happy with the way his beers are treated in some pubs. In fact, for a 
self-proclaimed hands-off brewery owner, he seems mightily involved in a good 
many aspects of the business.

In the interests of looking after his beers properly, he has formed a 
partnership with Richard and Victoria Smith, eminent restaurateurs of 
Sheffield, to develop a series of gastropubs. If their first venture, the 
Cricket Inn at Totley, is anything to go by, things are looking up in the 
Derbyshire/Yorkshire borders, because this is a model of how such things should 
be done - children, dogs and muddy boots welcome; civilised and kindly service; 
top-class beers properly treasured; and a really intelligent menu stuffed with 
properly prepared food. I don't ask for much more than that. Except, perhaps, 
for another pint of Jaipur IPA.
