
That the highest new entry in the World’s 50 Best Restaurants, the Clove Club 
<http://thecloveclub.com/> – straight in at No 26 – is run by two ex-DJs, will 
surprise people unfamiliar with clubland. And many of those in it, too.

By common consent, the last person you should ask to organise anything is a 
DJ. That is why the world has club promoters, to sort out the boring details 
while DJs carry on like DJs (pampered, intoxicated, high-maintenance divas).

The Clove Club has a very talented chef, Isaac McHale, but the influence of 
Daniel Willis and Johnny Smith (who used to DJ as Loose Fit and make music for 
labels such as Kompakt) has been key, in everything from fostering the 
restaurant’s informal vibe to bringing in cult graphic designer/musician, 
Trevor Jackson, to brand it. Naturally, the Clove Club’s background music (say, 
Bowie and Talking Heads obscurities) is on-point, too.

In fact, we are in the midst of a mini-boom for the DJ-restaurateur. In 
London, DJ Layo Paskin, who ran The End nightclub, now owns the fetedPalomar 
restaurant <http://thepalomar.co.uk/>, while US house DJ and BBQ fanatic, Seth 
Troxler, co-owns Smokey Tails, a diner that madethe Daily Telegraph reviewer 
complain 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/food-and-drink/restaurants/michael-deacon-reviews-smokey-tails-london-im-35-years-old-sudde/>
: “I’m 35 years old. Suddenly I felt about 70.” Turntablist DJ Yoda also has a 
BBQ restaurant, Austen’s, in Kensal Green, while LCD Soundystem’s James Murphy 
owns the Williamsburg wine bar and small plates joint,Four Horsemen 
<http://www.fourhorsemenbk.com/>.

The big beat DJ and Monkey Mafia man, Jon Carter, was an early pace-setter in 
all this. In 2014, he sold the pub company he had built, 580, for a reported 
£10.4m – which is even more than Calvin Harris earns for a gig in Vegas. Just.

In Manchester, DJs the Unabombers run Volta restaurant and, in September, will 
open a new space at the prestigious Palace Hotel. After falling in love with 
the back-street bars they used to visit between gigs in Italy and Spain – “All 
fat old men in braces shouting at each other over amazing food” – they found 
running restaurants a natural progression.

“When we did our club, Electric Chair, the sound, the lighting, even where the 
bar was positioned, these were all fundamental and that continues,” says Luke 
Cowdrey of the duo. “We’re obsessive about creating atmosphere. For instance, 
we still hate bright lights and, no, we don’t play house music at Volta. 
There’s nothing worse than trying to get stuck into a pork belly with a 128-bpm 
Basic Channel track playing.”

Despite that, Cowdrey sees a clear parallel between the Unabombers’ DJ style 
and the small-plates menu at Volta: “It sounds pretentious, but, like what we 
played as DJs, we wanted the food to be eclectic but work together.” That 
includes, he laughs, cueing up a few anthems: “You need some big tracks in 
there, like your calamari.”

From creating the right mix in a club at 4am to balancing a menu, DJs know how 
to please a crowd. They are restaurant naturals.
