
Many people join the voluntary sector because they are passionate about a 
cause and want to make a difference. Some professionals, however, are not 
content simply working for a charity – they want to set up their own. But where 
do you start?

Diana Nammi founded the Iranian and Kurdish Women’s Rights Organisation (IKWRO)
 <http://ikwro.org.uk/> at her kitchen table in 2002. Although her English was 
limited at the time – Nammi arrived in the UK as a political refugee from 
Kurdistan Iran – she enlisted the help of friends who helped her draw up a 
constitution, open up a bank account for the organisation and even become her 
first trustees.

Since the charity’s humble beginnings, it has grown to provide advice, 
advocacy and counselling to women from all Middle Eastern, north African and 
Afghan communities affected by so-called “honour” based violence, including 
forced marriage and female genital mutilation, as well as domestic violence. As 
executive director, she now leads a team of 18 staff speaking nine languages 
between them.

Related: Five ways to strengthen your charity's brand 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jan/21/five-ways-to-strengthen-your-charitys-brand>

Be clear on what you want to achieve

Nammi’s passion for setting up the organisation was driven by the brutal 
killing of her interpreter in the UK whose husband suspected she was flirting 
with a colleague. She was flown to Iraq under the false pretences of a holiday 
and was murdered. Nammi was determined to prevent other women of similar 
backgrounds living in Britain from meeting the same fate, but explains before 
you can achieve anything you need to be really clear about what your objectives 
are, why you exist and what makes you different from what else is out there.

“The most important thing is that you know why you are doing it,” she advises. 
“Then you need to show there is a strong need for your organisation’s activity. 
For me it was the need to help these women.”

You should also write a plan, she adds, outlining what you do, what your 
objectives are and, for fundraising in particular, you need to think about 
where you are now and where you want to get to in one, three, and five years 
time.

Conducting thorough research will help you to assess what else is out there 
and carve out how you are going to be different.

Look at what others are doing

Rachel Clacher, co-founder and director of telephone answering service 
Moneypenny, started a charity called theMoneypenny Foundation 
<https://www.moneypenny.com/uk/moneypenny-foundation/> in 2014 to help 
unemployed and disadvantaged young women turn their life around through a paid, 
six month traineeship.

The idea was to try and set up something similar to Jamie Oliver’s 15 
<http://www.fifteen.net/apprentice-programme/> but focused on geographical 
locations rather than a specific industry. For Clacher the first step was to 
look at best practice by other organisations.

Related: How to fundraise on Facebook 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/apr/01/how-to-fundraise-on-facebook>

“That was hugely illuminating for us and actually spurred us on,” she says. 
“We realised that our idea really had legs because we could see what other 
people had done and what we could offer that is different.”

She claims people were incredibly generous with their time and more than happy 
to share their success stories, as well as some of their mistakes. They then 
took what they had learned, sat down in a room and wrote a list of what the 
young women the charity aimed to help would actually want from the traineeship 
they hoped to offer them.

Test your idea

Instead of then launching a fully fledged charity, they decided to test the 
idea first by running the project as a one year pilot scheme. The foundation’s 
director, Diane Aplin, was hired to help run the project in March 2014 and says 
launching the organisation in this way helped them establish a set of clear 
objectives. Once they had decided what they wanted to achieve they were able to 
commit to running it using the charity model, rather than a social enterprise 
or other structure, and were officially registered as a charity in March 2015.

They are lucky to be part financed by her own company, Clacher admits, as 
attracting funders to a new charity with few results or outcomes to shout about 
can be a struggle. They hadn’t anticipated how time consuming fundraising was 
going to be for her small team of 10 staff. She says it is therefore important 
that you clearly communicate to potential financial backers and donors the 
stories of the people you are setting out to help.

She explains: “The most powerful asset that we have, our trainees, are now 
living transformed lives after the six months they spent with us. People really 
buy into that.”

Choose the right name

Choosing a name that clearly conveys your charity’s aims is also important to 
establish at the beginning. Clacher admits that they made a mistake with their 
choice of name and regrets rushing into it.

The problem, she says, is that people think her company Moneypenny funds all 
of the foundation’s operations. They are now going to change the name of the 
charity to Mind The Gap and Clacher hopes this will help with fundraising and 
clarify the business’s relationship with the foundation.

Create a community of support

Once you have established what your charity’s objectives are and how you will 
achieve that, it is important to get your message out to the wider public, the 
community you are striving to help and the people who are going to support you 
in doing that (volunteers and funders).

Nyree Ambarchian from Stand Agency <http://www.standagency.com/> – a PR 
company for the charity sector – claims one of the easiest and most cost 
effective ways of doing this is through social media.

Social media sites such as Twitter and Facebook are such important 
communication tools that you should get started on using them straight away if 
you can. However, before you do spend hours on Tweetdeck posting messages about 
your good work, make sure you assess its effectiveness for reaching the right 
audience for your charity’s individual aims.

“You need to figure out who you are trying to talk to and which communications 
tools are right for you,” she explains. “If you are trying to communicate with 
a very niche audience, for example, it might not be the best place to start. 
Twitter can be a massive drain on time.

“It is therefore important to think carefully about why you are doing it and 
what your objectives are for using social media. But it does help you achieve 
your aims and is a really good way of getting the word out there and getting 
people to take action on your behalf.”

A successful social media campaign can have a huge impact on raising your 
charity’s profile and fundraising.ASL’s ice bucket challenge 
<http://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/jul/01/what-i-learned-during-the-ice-bucket-challenge-be-ready-for-anything>
 is a classic example, with celebrity endorsements helping the charity raise 
millions.

Ambarchian adds that social media can also help with any pitches to potential 
funders.

“A lot of people go to funders saying they want this much money to do this, 
but you have to prove the impact of your work,” she says. “If you are going to 
funders without any track record or proof, you should do some media work first 
to try and get some coverage because it just helps you evidence the impact that 
you are making.”

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> – it’s free!
