
I am rummaging in my handbag for the door keys. It's raining horribly – the 
ideal weather to be locked out of your house with a pre-teen (who styled her 
hair that morning) and a baby. My 22-year-old son, who left the house to visit 
a friend 72 hours ago and hasn't been in touch since, picks this moment to leap 
out from behind a bush, tell me off for not being home (he lost his last set of 
keys) and ask to "borrow" (never have inverted commas been more appropriate) £2 
to buy some Kentucky Fried Chicken. Meanwhile, Flora's pushchair, in which 
she's sitting, nearly topples off the doorstep. Tilly, who started secondary 
school two weeks ago and has been given her first big lot of homework is 
hopping anxiously on alternate legs,

"Mum, where are the keys? I have to get in to do my homework. I've got five 
bits to do by Monday."

At least two of the pieces of homework are to decorate exercise books. This 
does not count as homework to me. Anyway, I can't find the wretched keys but I 
have to be somewhere else (or is it to two places?) in 10 minutes to pick up 
another of my children. Did I mention that in pushing Flora down the road I 
trod in some dog poo?

You're not coping, I tell myself, rather unkindly. You are really not coping.

It's a recent feeling, as two hours ago I had passed the funeral director's 
with its offer of a pre-paid funeral plan and felt truly grateful to be alive. 
But then the sun was shining and I thought I would always have my keys. Lydia 
(who's nine) and I were pushing Flora around the shops.

Lydia was asking for things. These things all had sugar in them.

"Can I have an ice lolly?"

"It's a bit cold."

"Can I have some strawberries?"

And I think oh, good, something healthy, but she means the synthetic sweet 
strawberries from our newsagents. "I'm so thirsty, what about a cold drink from 
the fridge?"

"We've got drinks at home," I say with some relief because sometimes my only 
answer is an unqualified no, which in our parents' day was fine but is less so 
now. In the chemist, Lydia, with no sense of irony, asks for a new toothbrush 
and some children's mouthwash that she saw advertised on the television. I get 
the nice man in the chemist to tell her she doesn't need the mouthwash – she 
just needs to brush her teeth properly. "And you certainly wouldn't need it if 
you didn't eat sweets and drink fizzy drinks," I say, although if I didn't 
supply them of course, she wouldn't have any.

Now, as I stand on my doorstep keyless and at least one child down, I realise 
why I've been flustered. J is taking Maddy, who is 19, back to university today 
and, as usual, a few hours after she's gone I feel terrible. I think of how 
she'll take Flora for me so I can have a bath, or go shopping with Tilly. Now 
I'll be smelly and Tilly will have nothing to do but her homework. I leave a 
frantic message on J's answerphone to say I'm locked out, and go to my 
neighbour's house. "I can't get into my house, I have no car and I miss Maddy," 
I say.

"Poor thing, I'd cry if I was you," she says. Then she gives us tea and sponge 
cake, and, best of all, offers to collect Lydia by car.

Half way into my cup of tea, J arrives back. Maddy picks this exact moment to 
call me.

"I do miss you, Mum," she says, trying to sound sad. Which is sweet and makes 
me feel loved, but her mates are laughing in the background and I'm quite happy 
that I don't believe her.
