
Hull is a place where you can make your mark. Take the university library, for 
example.

There have been only four librarians in the University of Hull’s 90-year 
history. In 1929, when very few women held prominent positions, the university 
employed suffragette Agnes Cuming to establish the library. She was followed by 
Britain’s finest post-war poet, Philip Larkin. He presided over the 
construction of the purpose-built library in 1959, and then oversaw a major 
extension in 1969. Scotsman Ian Mowat succeeded Larkin after his death in 1985. 
He established Hull as a place for library innovation, with his progressive use 
of technology.


This year, our current librarian, Richard Heseltine, retires. When he was 
appointed in 1992 he was the youngest University Librarian in the country. 
Today, he is the country’s longest-serving university librarian.

He recently oversaw the redevelopment of the university’s library, which now 
stands as a landmark of old and new, firmly signally the importance of the 
library at the heart of academic and cultural life of the campus.

The university spent £28m on the transformation, which also made the library 
into the cultural centre of the campus. It has a national-standard art gallery, 
containing the university’s outstanding art collection, and an adjoining 
exhibition hall which is used for everything from poetry readings to 
interactive science exhibitions.

The average time served by our librarians is nearly 22 years. Why do they stay 
so long? The evidence shows that our librarians have been allowed to make their 
mark on the campus, to show creativity and flair. But what else has kept them 
in the city?

You could turn to Larkin for an answer. He described Hull as a city with a 
different resonance; a city with elegance and a city which let him write. He 
also said Hull was “a little on the edge of things.”

It certainly offers a different way of life. It is a short drive from the east 
coast, or the Yorkshire Wolds. However, it is also only two-and-a-half hours, 
from London by train.

Next year, Hull will become the UK’s City of Culture. The Turner prize will be 
held in the city’s superb Ferens Art Gallery. This is just one event in a 
year-long programme that is being curated to celebrate traditional and 
contemporary culture. The University can expect to be a focal point for the 
celebrations. It is a principal partner of 2017 and the exclusive academic 
research partner.

The University of Hull needs a librarian who will continue the dedication and 
creativity shown by Agnes Cuming, Philip Larkin, Ian Mowat and Richard 
Heseltine. The vision for the library is for it to continue to be at the heart 
of the success of the university. The library helps build the stature, 
reputation and performance of the University.

It contributes to the development of our distinctive graduates, such as 
British film director Anthony Minghella, poet Douglas Dunn, and journalist 
Rosie Millard, who is now chair of the board of Hull City of Culture.

The library provides expert services in support of research and it encourages 
public engagement with the university. Today, following its hugely successful 
redevelopment, it stands as a powerful symbol of the University of Hull’s 
confidence in the future.

It contains almost 900,000 printed books; 85,000 electronic journals, and 
290,000 electronic books. It has a staff of 81. It needs a strong leader who 
will make a powerful contribution to the management and leadership of the 
university as a whole.


When poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy officially opened the redeveloped library 
last year she said the library was “inspirational” and “the best university 
library” she had ever seen. Now there is a chance for you to make your mark 
here.
