
The gang-rape of Mukhtar Mai in 2002 prompted an international outcry. The 
28-year-old woman, from a remote village inPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, was attacked on the orders of the 
villagejigra  (council) as a punishment after her 12-year-old brother was 
wrongly accused of having an illicit relationship with an older woman from the 
dominant clan in the village.

Six of the 14 men accused of the crime were given death sentences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/mar/04/pakistan.declanwalsh>, but they 
appealed andfive were acquitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/21/pakistan-gang-rape-mukhtaran-mai>
 by the Lahore high court, a ruling that was upheld by the supreme court three 
years ago.

Related: Pakistan court frees five alleged attackers in gang rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/21/pakistan-gang-rape-mukhtaran-mai>

Now, in an unprecedented move by the highest court in the country, a judge has 
ordered that the original verdict be reviewed.

 A judicial review of a supreme court decision is rare and represents a major 
breakthrough in Mai’s 14-year battle for justice.

“The judge wants to review our case because they have seen something that they 
hadn’t seen before. I haven’t been told what they have seen, but it’s made them 
look again,” said Mai, now 42.

“I have been told that it’s a one in a hundred chance that a case gets 
reviewed by the supreme court. However, I’m scared because the supreme court is 
the highest court in the country. After that, there is nowhere else I can go.

“It gives me a bit of peace that at least they are listening. My prayer is 
that these men are punished. If they don’t get justice in the court, then I 
hope Allah gives me justice.”

 A favourable ruling in Mai’s case “may create an impetus for rape law 
reform”, says Sahar Zareen Bandial, who played a key role in drafting proposed 
legislation to reform the rape laws, currently under review by a parliamentary 
committee.

 Bandial, a lawyer at Lahore University of Management Sciences, said the 
supreme court upheld the acquittals in Mai’s case on grounds of lack of 
evidence – partly based on the inconclusiveness of her own testimony – and the 
absence of corroborating evidence such as DNA and marks indicating a struggle.

 “A change in the supreme court’s position on these two questions of law and 
evidence may carry far-reaching consequences on how the criminal justice system 
determines the circumstantial requirement of lack of consent in cases of rape,” 
Bandial said. “A change in the supreme court’s conclusion on these two 
questions of evidence may help address the abysmal rate of conviction in rape 
cases.”



Sidra Humayun, from War Against Rape Lahore <http://www.warlahore.itgo.com/>, 
said: “In Pakistan, so few rape cases even reach the doors of the supreme 
court, so [the review] is a major breakthrough.

“Most people are scared to even report rape because of fears about their 
safety and family honour. When they are brave enough to report it, it is left 
to the lower courts to hear these cases, and when medical and legal support is 
not conducted fairly – either due to political pressure or pressure from the 
accused – rape cases will be disposed of.

“The police investigation is very complicated and adverse for women, 
particularly rape survivors. Investigating officers are not trained on how to 
handle rape cases and their focus is always on the survivor to provide the 
evidence because of the misconceptions around rape. Courts are not 
women-friendly environments so often any woman would prefer to quit her case as 
soon as possible.”

 Despite numerous offers to leave Pakistan, Mai decided to remain in the area 
where she grew up and used the 500,000 rupees (£3,300) compensation she 
received from the government to set up theMukhtar Mai Women’s Organisation 
<http://www.mukhtarmai.org/>, which includes a school and women’s refuge. 

 “One of the biggest reasons why this has been so hard for me is because I was 
not educated. That is why I wanted to start up a school,” said Mai. “We have 
had lots of threats against the school so we have lots of security, but we have 
had many success stories.”

 The organisation has received funding from the Virtue Foundation 
<https://virtuefoundation.org/project/mukhtar-mai-womens-rights-project/>, an 
NGO with special consultative status to the UN. Her work has been admired, but 
it has not been without controversy, with accusations that Mai was profiting 
from her projects, something she denies. “It hurts me when people say this, 
because any woman who has been raped would rather die than make money out of 
it. Money won’t buy back the honour and respect I lost.

“You never forget what has happened to you, and sometimes I wonder what is the 
point of living. I have been fighting like this for 14 years. My health is 
ruined and I am exhausted. Today, for the first time in ages, I took out my 
sewing machine and started sewing to try and distract my mind – but all I could 
think of was all the difficulties I’m facing.”

 Despite the physical and emotional toll, Mai remains adamant that women 
should speak up. “If any girl was in my situation, I would tell her that 
getting justice is very difficult. But we, as women, should still keep raising 
our voices. These court systems will have to change. But if we take this and 
stay quiet, it’s not good for us. Mothers, sisters, daughters, if we all unite 
and speak out, eventually we will get justice – if not for ourselves, for 
future generations.”
