
The Pigs Nose Inn

East Prawle, near Kingsbridge, Devon, 01548 511209

I'm torn between keeping this wonderful coastal pub to myself and giving it 
the PR it deserves. It's a great place to go in summer - after a day on the 
beach, everyone ends up here. Peter, the owner, is a fantastic host - there's 
always a slight sense of anarchy, in the nicest possible way, and he really 
knows how to look after his beer, much of it brewed locally.

Chez Panisse

1517 Shattuck Avenue, Berkeley, California, US, 00 1 510 548 5049

My first meal here 12 years ago was a watershed moment. I was blown away by 
Alice Waters' approach - the quality of the ingredients, the importance of 
provenance, the friendly, informal service, the way there was only one option 
for each course. By the end of the meal, my wife and I had decided to open a 
restaurant run along the same lines back at Riverford Farm. It took eight years.

Ballymaloe

Shanagarry, County Cork, Ireland, 00 353 21 4652 531

Myrtle Allen, the woman behind Ballymaloe, is another huge influence. She 
cooks the way my mum, also a farmer's wife, used to. Every time I've eaten here 
it's been fantastic: seasonal, regional and simply but skilfully made, be it 
vast bowls of shell-on prawns or a pudding made with carrageen.

The Tacos Stand

Los Cerritos beach, near Pescadero, Baja California Sur, Mexico

Served from a shack on my favourite surfing beach in the world, these tacos 
make up some of my happiest eating memories. No beef, just fish - strips of 
dorado, sizzled in hot oil for 30 seconds, piled into a fresh taco with 
shredded lettuce, guacamole, coriander, chilli, salsa and an ice-cold Tecate 
beer on the side.

Hill House Nursery

Landscove, Ashburton, Devon, 01803 762273

Based in a rectory, this quirky garden centre stocks an eclectic selection of 
plants and serves the most wonderful homemade scones and cakes.

Agaric

30 North Street, Ashburton, Devon, 01364 654478

Nick, the owner of this restaurant with rooms, is a great mushroom forager 
(hence its name). His food is modern European, very accomplished, and he runs 
very good cookery classes, too.

· Guy Watson runs Riverford Farm in Devon. Riverford Farm Cook Book, by Guy 
Watson and Jane Baxter, is published next month.
