
Last December I finally told my partner that I had been taking heroin for two 
months. She was shocked and angry, but supportive. She knew that I had been 
horribly unhappy. Over the past three years, I had gone through wave after wave 
of depression due to overwork in my job as a senior lecturer.


Five months ago, the inevitable happened. I had a depressive episode on the 
very first day of term. I felt suicidal. Not “they’ll be sorry when I’m gone” 
but “how can I put this person who happens to be me out of their misery?”.

I went for the second-best thing: I bought a gram of heroin. I smoked some and 
felt better – so much better that I threw out the rest. But the next day was 
just as bad. Within a week, I’d bought another gram. This time I didn’t throw 
any out.

Related: Student mental health: a new model for universities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/02/student-mental-health-a-new-model-for-universities>

It was the first time I had tried heroin, but I’d had experience with other 
class-A drugs. The internet provided me with the information I needed to find, 
purchase and smoke it. I did the rest.

My problems started when I quit my job as a senior lecturer in Australia to 
take up a similar position at a top research university in the south of 
England. My partner and I thought this would be a sound career move for both of 
us. I had relatively few papers for my career stage, but they were well-cited.

We had good reason to move – my partner was finishing her PhD and we knew that 
it would be difficult for us both to get academic jobs in the same city. In 
Australia, where the distances between settlements are so great, that would be 
difficult to manage. In the UK, we hoped things would be easier.


However, I hadn’t reckoned on the high cost of living in England. My pay had 
doubled but the rent on a small apartment was more than double the cost of our 
mortgage in Australia. We had also overestimated the ease with which my partner 
could get a job. There were more academic jobs going in England but there were 
more hungry young PhDs graduates applying for them too.

The other thing I hadn’t expected was the scale of the workload. The teaching 
commitment was high – about 10 contact hours per week (double what I had 
experienced before). During term time, I was spending the whole working week 
either teaching or preparing to teach, with no time for research.

I found myself lying awake at night worrying about our finances. Worrying 
about whether I was a good teacher.

I found myself lying awake at night worrying about our finances. Worrying 
about whether I was a good teacher. Worrying about how I would find time for 
research. Insomnia wasn’t normal for me, but it had crept up, so I didn’t see 
it as unusual. After a difficult phone call with a colleague, I started crying 
and couldn’t stop. My partner urged me to make an appointment with the doctor – 
I was given anti-depressants and a letter to say I would be unfit for work for 
the next four weeks.

The sick leave was supposed to give me space to try to figure out what the 
problem was and how I was going to solve it. This is a bad idea when you are 
depressed, because depressed people tend to attribute problems to their own 
failings. I thought that I must be managing my time poorly, and working 
inefficiently. I spent my sick leave reading books on time management and 
consulting my colleagues to find out how they dealt with the workload. Their 
advice included:

“Learn to say no”

Anyone who thinks you can deal with overwork by saying no has never been 
over-worked. I tried refusing to chair a committee. My head of department 
breezily assured me that he was not asking, he was telling me what I was 
contractually obliged to do.

“Work weekends and evenings during term and take whole weekdays off during the 
vacation” 

Related: Dark thoughts: why mental illness is on the rise in academia 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/mar/06/mental-health-academics-growing-problem-pressure-university>

I can’t believe I actually thought this was a good idea. I would spend six 
days a week working and the seventh doing housework. When the vacation did roll 
around, I would crash into exhaustion and depression and feel guilty that I 
wasn’t doing research or getting ahead on teaching for the next term.

“Stick it out for now, let people know that you’re movable and take another 
job that’s more to your taste”

This was reasonably good advice, in a way. I am lucky that I am established 
enough to be reasonably confident of getting another academic job. But with no 
time for research, every year that passed made my CV look weaker (or so it 
seemed to me) and my depression meant that I was in no fit state to sell myself 
at an interview.

And so I blundered on. The next three years followed a pattern. I would start 
full of conviction that I could turn the situation around. I would work harder 
and longer – and each year I would reach breaking point, collapse with a 
depressive episode, take sick leave and mull over what I had done wrong this 
time. The episodes got earlier and longer. Each year I ended up with a higher 
dose of anti-depressants. And finally, heroin.

I’ve been clean for three months now and my partner and I both resigned our 
jobs – we are going to move home. I have a lot of work to do to repair our 
relationship, but I am much happier.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
