
My kitchen is … a student kitchen. I’m at university in Leeds, sharing a flat 
with four others. It’s an open-plan kitchen and dining area, with a big island 
in the middle in place of a table. There’s lots of counter space, which is 
good. It’s speckled though, so it’s quite hard to tell when it’s dirty! I don’t 
really like the electric cooker – I find it so frustrating after cooking on a 
gas hob. We’ve also got one big fridge freezer to share. It’s definitely 
spacious, so I could have lots of people over, but most of the time I just cook 
for myself.

My favourite kitchen tool is … my set of four Japanese santoku-style knives. 
They have lovely wooden handles and carbon steel blades.

My kitchen staple is … red onions. They’re really sweet and so versatile – you 
can use them raw in salads, you can pickle them and they go bright pink, you 
can caramelise them ... and they work in any kind of cooking. I never buy white 
onions anymore.

When I’m starving I … have yoghurt and muesli or a slice of bread with almond 
butter. I usually bake a loaf of bread at the beginning of the week. And 
there’s a kilogram tub of almond butter in the fridge at all times.

My culinary inspiration is … Instagram. It’s such an easy way to access images 
and ideas from across the world, at any time of day. You can be in bed looking 
at someone’s breakfast in Australia and think: “Ooh, I’ll have that tomorrow.” 
I’m constantly adding new people to the list I follow.

Related: My kitchen secrets: Fanny Zanotti | Kitchen encounters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/23/fanny-zanotti-my-kitchen-my-inspiration-kitchen-encounters>

My best-kept kitchen secret is … cooking extra. If I’m roasting veg I’ll do 
more than I need for the meal, and if I’m making bread I’ll double the recipe. 
I’m always in preparation for the next meal. I try to plan meals at the 
beginning of the week and work out how I can make everything easier. I like 
things to be efficient, and I hate wasting food. It makes shopping easier too.

My current obsession is … oats. I really love steel-cut pinhead oats for 
porridge. I buy oat milk now too – it’s really nice and creamy and it works in 
baking. Oats also make good flour, when blended in the food processor. I love 
the flavour they bring to baking. I’ve been quite interested in alternative 
baking for a while now – using different flours and fats, and alternatives to 
eggs (chia, flax …)

Everything tastes better with … company. Cooking with someone, then sitting 
down and eating with them – the food just always tastes better. I’m so used to 
my mum cooking, and everyone helping and sitting down together. I look forward 
to that whenever I go home.

When I go shopping I … try to make a list of the things I need. Otherwise I 
end up buying random stuff, but land up not having any yoghurt for breakfast. 
But I’m always open to discoveries as well.

 * Izy Hossack blogs at topwithcinnamon.com <http://www.topwithcinnamon.com/>. 
Her book, Everyday Delicious (Hardie Grant), is out now in paperback. Izy will 
be taking over Cook’s Instagram account this weekend. Follow @guardian_cook 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/> for updates. 