
Summer festival season is upon us. You don’t want to be that person who’s had 
one too many drinks and collapsed in the Chemical Brothers crowd. Nor do you 
want to be the one who gets sunstroke on the first day and spends the rest of 
the weekend in a dark tent.

In many ways, one weekend at a festival can amount to a year’s worth of fun. 
Maybe the mistakes and rookie errors are all part of the experience. But if you 
want to avoid at least some common pitfalls then read on, because we’ve got 
them covered.

Not washing

Some think that going to a festival means it’s compulsory to not wash for a 
week. Grimy fingernails, along with a vintage top hat or a Topshop headpiece, 
might all be part of the “festival look”. But there’s nothing inauthentic about 
staying clean, if you can.

Take some wet wipes, take a toothbrush and take a shower if possible. It might 
make you feel better.

“My friends sneered at the fact that I would get up every day to walk 30 
minutes to go to the showers, which was totally not their priority,” says 
Alastair Smith, 22, a student from Leeds. “One friend in particular found the 
concept of showering absurd. I know it’s not the point of a festival, but a 
shower every two days helped me come back to life and feel ready to get back 
involved.”

Being too cold

At UK festivals in particular, the weather matters a lot. It can make or break 
the trip. “I was atGatecrasher <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gatecrasher> in 
2008 and the weather was horrendous,” says Becky Dailey, 29, from Marlow, 
Buckinghamshire. “You couldn’t really hear the music because the wind was 
blowing it away. Tents flew away; ours had a leak and my friend and I woke up 
with soaking wet hair.”

Related: From wild camping to festivals: have a sustainable student summer 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/09/from-wild-camping-to-festivals-have-a-sustainable-student-summer>

She adds: “We had to escape to a pub near the camp just to experience a scrap 
of warmth. Lots of the main acts even pulled out because the weather was that 
bad.”

Even if the forecast is okay and it’s the middle of August, always take 
waterproofs and a coat for the nighttime.

Being too hot

It’s not just at UK festivals that the weather can make or break your 
experience. Hot countries present their own problems.

“The second time I went to Benicassim it was a heatwave and we sweltered in 
the tents the whole time,” says Dailey. “On the last night we decided we had to 
just sleep under the stars.”

If you’re camping at a hot festival, the trick is to get there early and park 
your tent under a shady tree. Otherwise, cue sunrise at 6am, when you’re 
probably still partying on the beach, the tent turns into a hothouse and you’ve 
missed your chance to get some sleep.

Becoming a liability

You can have the best time going to festivals with big groups, even when you 
only know one person from the gang. You’re out of your normal environment, 
sleep-deprived, hungry and excited, and surrounded by people feeling the same. 
It can be the ideal place to make new friends.

However, in these sort of situations there are always people who become a 
nightmare. “One guy was a complete menace the whole time during our trip to 
Benicassim,” says Dailey. “He was so manic and took so many drugs and then 
finally smoked some dodgy weed, threw up and passed out for hours. It was so 
peaceful, the rest of us loved it.”

Joe Clarkson, 21, a student from Glasgow, agrees. Last year, an old friend 
from school got in touch via Twitter to say he had a Glastonbury ticket but his 
group were no longer coming, could he go with him and his pals. “I said ‘of 
course’. He expressed concern that he wouldn’t be welcomed by the group, I told 
him ‘nonsense, it’s Glastonbury, everybody is happy to see people’.”

However, according to Clarkson, the friend got completely wasted. “I found 
myself looking after him the whole time.” Don’t be this person.

Not having anywhere to sleep

I know one guy who went to Glastonbury in 2007 – one of the wettest years on 
record <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/7450410.stm> – thinking he’d be 
sharing a tent with a girl. It turned out she was sharing with another guy 
(probably her boyfriend) and the unnamed man spent three nights freezing, 
curled up on the ground, by the side of the dance tent.

Related: How to graduate into Glastonbury 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/12/degrees-in-festival-management-students-glastonbury>

The moral of this story is don’t rely on others. Make sure you know how many 
people your tent comfortably sleeps and ideally, get someone to save you a 
camping spot before you arrive.

And, whatever you do, never, ever take one of those one-person, coffin shaped 
ones. You won’t have any space for a bag, only you can be in there – horizontal 
at all times – and, because it’s a tent, you’ll be able to hear people walking 
past and commenting on what kind of a weird person would bring that to a 
festival. Just don’t do it.

Not having a get-out plan

Getting wasted in a field with all your mates, seeing your favourite DJs and 
not having to go to work or uni on a Monday is great. But waking up in a barren 
wasteland when it’s all over and everyone else has left is anything but fun. 
Sort your exit in advance. Book a coach, organise a lift, or buy a train ticket.

As Clarkson advises, always make sure you’ve got a reliable designated driver. 
“The last night [of Glastonbury] was annoying because we had agreed a 7am leave 
to beat traffic – my old school friend was driving – and when I headed back to 
sleep and pack up at 1am, he assured me he wouldn’t be more than another hour.” 
Clarkson ended up packing up alone, while the friend arrived back at the tent, 
off his face, at 5am. “We were stuck there for another day.”


Going on about it forever

If you’re still wearing your wristband from last year’s festival a year on, or 
droning on endlessly about how this year’s not as good as last year because 
you’re an old hand, then just stop. Yes, you had a reallygreat time and you 
completely overdid it, but, I’m sorry to say, no one really cares.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
