
• The variegated grass Phalaris arundinacea, or gardener's garters, is too 
invasive for many gardens, but has tended to thrive where other grasses have 
petered out, perhaps due to the damp soil.

• Monocultures of brightly coloured grasses echo the crops of the past and are 
never high enough to block the views of the modern-day fields beyond.

• Box hedges are kept low, so they can be crossed with an easy stride to make 
movement from one compartment to another as simple as possible when tending the 
garden.

• Ferns and Carex pendula (in the foreground) are welcome visitors, and are 
allowed to distribute themselves wherever they wish.

• Standing stones, a feature of the local landscape, have been placed within 
the garden to make a connection with an ancient past.

The creators of the gardens at Veddw eschew the idea of endless flowers and 
mixed borders. Instead, Anne Wareham and Charles Hawes have created a garden 
based on ideas rather than on conventional horticultural formulas.

Although some of the ideas are perhaps a little overegged - for example, the 
curve-backed bench cut in a naive wave to look like the Monmouthshire hills - 
others are sublime. Wareham has based the layout of the garden's grasses 
parterre (pictured) on a tithe map from the 1840s, with box hedges mimicking 
the original pattern of field boundaries. This field system in miniature makes 
an intellectual connection with the rolling farmland beyond and immediately 
anchors the garden in its surroundings.

As Wareham says, the parterre "has the essential virtue of being a low, flat 
planting, so it doesn't obscure the view over the Veddw valley".

The garden is large - two acres of woods matched by a similar sized ornamental 
garden - and the plant palette is restricted to introduce order and 
tranquillity. Yet Wareham allows rosebay willowherb to self-seed, and even 
grows named cultivars of this invasive weed. With formal vistas alongside wild 
meadows, this is an ideal marriage of wildness and control (veddw.co.uk 
<http://www.veddw.co.uk>).
