 Common, a late-night bar in Manchester's Northern Quarter, has upped its game 
this year and now includes New York deli-inspired dishes on the menu 
Common

The food at this late-night Northern Quarter music bar has always been 
unusually good. For many regulars, its chilli, its chicken and chorizo stew 
and, particularly, its falafel and halloumi open kebab, form a beer-food Holy 
Trinity. This year, however, the kitchen has really upped its game. The menus 
are now designed by Laurence Tottingham, one half of the husband-and-wife chef 
duo who run Prestwich's acclaimedAumbry <http://www.aumbryrestaurant.co.uk/> 
and, alongside a range of sandwiches and classy burgers (try the 
pastrami-and-Emmental-topped Reuben), you can expect to see broadly New York 
deli-inspired dishes on the specials menu, such as an excellent shredded 
salt-beef sauerkraut stack, huevos rancheros and an Italian meatball sub. 
Common is the sister bar ofPort Street Beer House 
<http://www.portstreetbeerhouse.co.uk/>, and so, naturally, it carries an 
interesting range of cask, imported keg and bottled beers.
• Light bites and sandwiches, £2.50-£5.95, meals £6-£8.50. 39-41 Edge Street, 
0161 832 9245,aplacecalledcommon.co.uk <http://www.aplacecalledcommon.co.uk/>

Slice Pizza & Bread Bar
 Counter culture at Slice 
In Rome pizza isn't round; it's rectangular and served al taglio (by the 
slice). The owners of this pizza bar travelled to the Italian capital to learn 
how it's done, and it shows. Everything is made onsite, every day, and it's all 
good, from the elegant simplicity of the beautifully light, bouncy focaccia, 
dressed with olive oil, rosemary and sea salt, to classic toppings such as 
broccoli, sausage and chilli. Those pizzas that employ very thinly sliced 
potato stand out (it adds a buttery dimension and boosts overall savoury 
oomph). If you end up staggering around the Northern Quarter late at night, 
looking to stave off a hangover, it's worth noting that at weekends, Slice 
remains open, for takeaway only, from 10pm to 1am.
• Slices £2-£2.75. 1A Stevenson Square, 0161 236 9032, slicepizza.co 
<http://slicepizza.co/>

Gorilla
 Half a tandoori chicken with apricot bulgar wheat, flat bread and saffron 
garlic mayo at Gorilla 
Do you love eggs Benedict? Do you want to listen to the Pixies while you eat 
it? If so, you're in the right place. A gig venue and late-night bar, Gorilla 
is also a surprisingly good casual dining space, open from 9am at weekends. The 
various elements of that eggs Benedict (£5.50) are bright, fresh, pin-sharp. 
The full English, meanwhile, comes with Gorilla's own-recipe sausages (made by 
renowned Chorlton butcher WH Frost) and quality bacon from over the border in 
Cheshire. The coffee's not bad, either. Although, for Manchester's best flat 
white (£2.60), head toNorth Tea Power <http://northteapower.co.uk/> (36 Tib 
Street, 0161 833 3073).

Later in the day, the menu expands to take in snazzy sandwiches (a ciabatta of 
stuffed porchetta, crackling and salsa verde), burgers, dogs, interesting 
seasonal soups and salads, and an African chermoula-spiced kebab. One warning: 
tread carefully with the more interesting bottled and canned craft beers, 
which, in all Trof's venues (they own a few across town) tend to be pricey. 
Think £4.50 for a 35.5cl can of Brooklyn lager.
• Breakfast, £4-£9.95, light meals and sandwiches, £4.50-£8.50, mains from 
£7.50. 54-56 Whitworth Street, 0161 407 0301,thisisgorilla.com 
<http://www.thisisgorilla.com/>

Pancho's Burritos
 Topped tacos at Pancho’s Burritos 
The Arndale Market food hall (don't worry, it is not as posh as that might 
sound) has numerous affordable places to eat but, personally, I rarely get past 
Pancho's. Run by Mexican chef Enrique Martinez, it deals in big, fat, sloppy 
burritos, stuffed with slow-cooked meats – pulled pork with lime, pork with 
fleshy cactus, beef inpasilla chilli sauce – that deliver masses of flavour. 
Grab a seat, because there is no way you'll be able to walk and eat one of 
these monsters, unless you want meat juices, refried beans, sour cream andpico 
de gallo salsa all down your shirt. Pancho's also does topped tacos and 
quesadillas, but the new hit is its tomato-and-ancho-chilli azteca soup 
(£2.50), which is all upfront fruity tomato flavours, riding waves of smokiness 
and lip-tingling heat.
• Burritos from £3.99. Unit FC1, Arndale Market food hall, 49 High Street, 
07508 745498,panchosburritos.co.uk <http://panchosburritos.co.uk/>

Mark Addy
 Mussel and taragon soup at Mark Addy 
It's a funny place, the Mark Addy. A riverside pub with a certain faded 1980s 
wine bar glamour, it has a once-ritzy façade that could not be more at odds 
with the ethos of its chef, Robert Owen Brown. A local lad, Owen Brown loves 
gutsy, no-nonsense northern cooking. He lives to do rib-sticking things with 
tripe, Bury black pudding and Eccles cakes – and at affordable prices, too. At 
lunch, you could do worse than share a few of the bar snacks: a Manchester egg 
(a northern take on the scotch egg), spam fritters and the Blacksticks blue 
cheese bhajis, which are a meal in themselves. There are also sandwich meals 
with chips and, at night, the budget traveller can choose between a cheese and 
pâté platter, and a couple of the sub-£10, pub-style mains (a serviceable 
burger, better fish 'n' chips).

Try to save some money to sample a couple of halves from the six real ales 
(pint from £3.10). As well as beers from Macclesfield's fantastic Red Willow, 
the pumps often feature beers from the region's less well-known micros. Indeed, 
if you're more interested in drinking than eating, use this pub as the 
starting-point for a short pub crawl down Chapel Street into Salford 
(technically, the Mark Addy is just over the border). Don't miss the King's 
Arms (11 Bloom Street, 0161 839 8726,kingsarmssalford.com 
<http://kingsarmssalford.com>) run by the Beautiful South's Paul Heaton, which 
is also the "local" in Channel 4's Fresh Meat – and exceptional ale enclave the 
New Oxford (Bexley Square, 0161 832 7082,thenewoxford.com 
<http://thenewoxford.com>).
• Snacks, sandwich meals and platters, £2.40-£7.25, mains from £9.45. Stanley 
Street, Salford, 0161 832 4080,markaddy.co.uk <http://www.markaddy.co.uk>

This & That
 This & That is one of the Northern Quarter's original curry cafes 
Tucked down a side street in the Northern Quarter, This & That is one of the 
area's original curry cafes, where you can pick-up a filling "rice 'n' three" 
(choices of curry) for a few quid. It's a no-frills joint, but the food is 
fresh, homemade and uses whole spices to give the dishes the kind of wallop of 
flavour that you wouldn't normally expect at a sub-£5 price. The various lamb 
curries usually deliver a good savoury gravy and a reasonable amount of tasty 
meat, but, for me, its the veggie curries – particularly the chana masala, the 
daals and the spinach curry – that really sing with flavour. The help-yourself 
curry toppings (coriander, green chillies, raw onion) are a nice touch, and, of 
the supplementary snacks, the samosas (a shade greasy, perhaps, but packed with 
beautifully seasoned mince, potato and onion) are recommended.
• Meal from £3.30. 3 Soap Street, 0161 832 4971, thisandthatcafe.co.uk 
<http://thisandthatcafe.co.uk/>

Almost Famous 
 Jam-packed burgers at Almost Famous 
I almost didn't include AF. Not because it's hugely over-hyped (which it is) 
and not because, at weekends, the queue for a table will sap your will to live. 
No, I almost didn't include it because AF sells itself in a very un-Manchester 
tone of, not hipster cool exactly, more lippy idiocy. On the website and on the 
walls, there is a lot of attitude and a lot of pointless posturing about its 
take-it-or-leave-it, love-us-or-hate-us untamed approach. There are signs 
banning photography. It sells a cocktail, Bitch Juice, which the menu warns 
(promises?) "may result in actual orgasm". Almost Famous asks so desperately 
and repeatedly, "Are we cool? Are we cool yet? Are we edgy?" The only 
reasonable answer is no. There is, however, no arguing with the burgers. They 
are sensational. The best in Manchester, by some distance. The "triple nom" (of 
course the burgers have irritating names) is the pick. It's packed with, not 
just two juicy patties, but a wad of moist, nicely charred barbecue rib meat, 
whose savoury depth acts as the best counterpoint to AF's slightly too sweet, 
but well-delineated sauces. The kitchen likes to keep things sloppy, so that 
burger also comes with a thick layer of fine red cabbage and red onion 
coleslaw. The reasonably durable semi-brioche bun doesn't quite hold everything 
in, but keeps it manageable. The fries, mined with pieces of sweet potato, are 
good; the "chilli cheese fries" (£5, chilli over fries, topped with a further 
mustardy-cheesy sauce) aren't worth the expense. The beer (Brooklyn lager, 
33cl, £4.50) is pretty expensive, too.

Note: if you can't be bothered with the queues, nearby SoLita (Turner Street, 
+44 (0)161 839 2200,solita.co.uk <http://solita.co.uk/>), serves a fairly good, 
bone marrow-moistened burger from its Inka grill (£10.90). It's £5.95 lunchtime 
menu is worth a look, too. Or, over the other side of town, the Lincoln 
cheeseburger at Brewdog (35 Peter Street, 0161 832 1922,brewdog.com 
<http://www.brewdog.com/>) is a doozy. It's just £4.95, and, naturally, the 
beer choice (pint from £3.95) is far superior.
• Burgers £6-£7, fries £2. 100 High Street, no phone, almostfamousburgers.com 
<http://almostfamousburgers.com/>

KuKoos
 Kukoos' colourful collection of pickle jars 
Ingeniously located on Oxford Road, or "student alley", this modish, 
utilitarian canteen specialises in affordable Moroccan, Lebanese and Indian 
street food. A little surprisingly, given that it's a spin-off from 
well-regarded local curry house Zouk, the dosas need work. The masala potato 
filling was top, long on flavour, full of herbs and mustard seeds, and the 
chutneys – a minted, almost sour, green coconut one, and a fruity carrot number 
– were great. But the dosa "pancake" itself wasn't crisp and light enough. It 
was a shade flabby. KuKoos spritzy salads, however, are unquestionably A1. Its 
verdant, citrusy tabbouleh could hold its own in Beirut; the golden quinoa, 
dressed with orange juice and studded with fat raisins, was as tasty as health 
food is ever going to get. The menu also runs to hot wraps and snacks such as 
samosas and soups. With service as bright and cheery as its salads, and prices 
kept very keen – that dosa was just £3.50 – it is little wonder that KuKoos is 
already thriving.
• Snacks from £1, light meals £3-£5. 12a Oxford Road, 0161 236 7989, 
kukoos.co.uk <http://kukoos.co.uk/>

Vnam
 Vnam's pho – a bouncing broth with cinnamon and star anise flavours 
Modern Manchester looks polished and shiny, but you don't have to walk very 
far out of the centre to see another side of the city. And you should. Shabby 
Oldham Road is every bit as representative as swanky King Street and, thanks to 
this small, simple Vietnamese cafe, much tastier. Vnam's pho – that iconic 
noodle soup – is a belter: the broth bouncing with cinnamon and star anise 
flavours, the various cuts of beef included unusually flavourful, many edged 
with tasty fat. For the money (from 12pm to 1.30pm, the pho is £7.95 with a 
soft drink), the detail is excellent. That pho arrives with a good side of 
fresh mint and coriander, bean shoots, chillies and lime to add as you see fit. 
If pho seems a bit too familiar, there is plenty more to explore on the menu, 
from BBQ quail and lamb chops – served with a lime, sea salt and black pepper 
dipping sauce – to a prawn and pork lotus root salad. Also BYO (£1 corkage).
• Main noodle and rice dishes, £6.25-£8.35. 140 Oldham Road, 0161 205 2700, 
vnam.co.uk <http://vnam.co.uk/>

Habesha
 Habesha serves Ethiopian food under a tenner 
Normally, £8 doesn't buy you much in terms of foodie adventure. However, at 
this east African restaurant, for less than a tenner, you can sample Ethiopian 
dishes, such asawaze tibs and gored gored, and wash them down with a bottle of 
imported (and fairly generic, actually) St George lager (£2-£2.50). It's rustic 
stuff. Mydoro wot comprised a bowl of sauce with the trimmed, central section 
of a chicken carcass in it, pieces of chicken breast still attached to the 
bird's breastbone. There wasn't a huge amount of meat there, but, as a dish, 
this was less about protein than that luscious sauce. It was an impossibly rich 
(many Ethiopian dishes are begun by frying off the ingredients in seasoned 
butter) red pepper and onion stew, highly but not particularly hotly spiced – 
ginger and cardamom are the primary seasonings – that, as a rough guide, was 
halfway between a proper rogan josh and the deep, savoury silkiness of a French 
onion soup. I wasn't sold on the hard-boiled egg that is also part of the dish, 
but the sauce worked brilliantly with theinjera, the huge spongy, lemony-sour 
pancakes that you use to mop everything up with. Neatly decked out with African 
fabrics, pictures and knick-knacks, Habesha is basic, but much nicer than you 
might imagine, given that it is above a busy takeaway. You'll find it upstairs 
in the Istanbul Express kebab house in the Gay Village.
• Mains £5.50-£7.50. 29-31 Sackville Street, 0161 228 7396, 
habesharestaurant.co.uk <http://habesharestaurant.co.uk/>
