
The sun shone brightly on the tumbling waters of the River Naver in 
Sutherland. Rather too brightly for my liking. It was great weather for the 
Scottish Tourist Board, bad weather for fishermen - very bad weather for 
fishermen. There was nothing for it. I flipped the top off a bottle of Black 
Isle Brewery Yellowhammer IPA and let the golden, lightly bitter, gently malted 
liquor course down my throat. OK, OK, that sounds like a commercial, but that's 
how it happened, and while one bottle did not quite put right the frustrations 
of a fruitless morning on the river, it did quench a raging thirst, and I 
thanked my foresight in having popped into the brewery the day before.

As the name suggests, you'll find the Black Isle Brewery on the Black Isle, a 
curious and delightful projection just north of Inverness; that is, Ross & 
Cromarty, much loved of anyone who listens to the Shipping Forecast. It is 
rich, rolling farmland, green and wooded, more like Kent than Scotland, it 
seemed to me. And tucked down a narrow lane is the cluster of cow sheds and 
barns that houses David Gladwin's brewhouse, bottling plant, shop and office.

Gladwin has that energetic enthusiasm for his product that makes anyone seem 
young. Originally he came to the area to help out a brother-in-law near Beauly 
a few miles away, and he loved it so much that he decided to stay. Having 
decided to stay, he needed to find a way to support his family, so nine years 
ago he set up the brewery. Scotland seemed to him in need of decent beer, and 
the micro-brewery revolution had been slow to catch on round these parts. It 
seemed a good idea to fill the gap in the market.

Had he any experience of brewing? "I had brewed beer at home, and that was 
about it," Gladwin says with a smile. "But I love beer, and making it is a bit 
like cooking: you have to start with good ingredients."

He didn't make life any easier for himself by deciding to go organic from the 
start. This was at a time when it was received wisdom in the brewing industry 
that you couldn't do organic beers, you couldn't get organic barley and hops - 
and anyway, the organic thing was just a phase. Gladwin is not a man to accept 
as gospel the nostrums of the brewing industry, but even he says it hasn't been 
easy: "It's hard to get the consistency of quality and supply." Consequently, 
he gets malted barley from the maltings at Warminster, about which I wrote the 
other week.

In spite of these obstacles, Gladwin and his team produce six regular beers: 
Red Kite and Yellowhammer, classic hoppy ales both; and Blonde, a 
Bavarian-style lager; and three bottle-conditioned beers - Scotch Ale, brewed 
with peat-smoked whisky malt, Porter, and the Belgian-syle Wheat Beer. Finally, 
they also produce seasonal beers - Hibernator, Goldeneye Heather Honey and 
Raspberry Wheat, because "I want to bring a bit of fun into beer."

Balance, Gladwin feels, is the key to a good beer. The effect he is trying to 
achieve with each of his beers, he says, is the drinker feeling, "God, that was 
good. I may just have another."

Most of the brewery's production of 7,500 litres is bottled and sold through 
independent off-licences. In part, this is dictated by the types of beers they 
make, but also by Gladwin's experience that publicans do not keep them with 
care. And, as he says, a drinker rarely blames the landlord for a duff pint. 
They put it down to the brewer.

This policy doesn't seem to have affected demand - in fact, Gladwin is about 
to increase capacity to around 45,000 litres. And his ambitions don't stop 
there. He hopes to turn the 130 acres he owns around the brewery into an 
organic Golden Valley, growing the barley for his beer, building up his flock 
of Hebridean sheep and adding hens to his menagerie. I get the feeling that 
Gladwin is definitely a glass-half-full kind of chap.

Where to get it

Black Isle Brewery
Old Allangrange, Munlochy, Ross-shire, Scotland
01463 811871, blackislebrewery.com <http://www.blackislebrewery.com>
