
A career in music, whether as a performer or composer, is intensely 
competitive. It takes time to develop, too – which is why a lot of young people 
sign up for a master’s degree to help them on their way.

Student flautist Taylor MacLennan, 23, is on a two-year master’s degree in 
performance, with the aim of pursuing a career as an orchestral musician. He 
enrolled on the course at theRoyal College of Music <http://www.rcm.ac.uk/> 
(RCM) straight after his undergraduate degree at the same institution, because 
he felt he needed extra training and more experience.

“Orchestral and chamber music are a passion of mine and the college offers 
opportunities to perform with conductors such as Bernard Haitink and Vladimir 
Ashkenazy,” he says. “This is perfect for what I want to do.”

Because of his skill, Taylor has been accepted on to the Pathways scheme with 
the BBC Symphony Orchestra. That means he is assigned a mentor from the 
orchestra and can take part in rehearsals, including for the BBC Proms.

He has also formed a contemporary ensemble that commissions new composers and 
is beginning to hold concerts outside the college.

The master’s exposes young people to the world of music and a support network, 
says Natasha Loges, head of RCM’s postgraduate programmes. “It hones their 
ideas of what a good performance is or is not,” she says. “If you are not in 
that structure, how do you know?”

Students <http://www.theguardian.com/education/students> undertaking master’s 
degrees in performance receive considerable help with their career. The RCM has 
a Creative Careers Centre that helps them plan their career during their 
studies and for five years after graduation.

Related: Master's students with a hands-on approach to health challenges 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/11/masters-students-with-a-hands-on-approach-to-health-challenges>

The Guildhall School of Music and Drama  <http://www.gsmd.ac.uk/>provides a 
similar service to its 350 postgraduates, encouraging them to think about a 
portfolio career that combines freelance performing with teaching.

It also places an onus on entrepreneurial attitude. Students on the course 
receive individual tuition from Guildhall professors or from a London Symphony 
Orchestra player who is also a Guildhall professor. They can take part in 
masterclasses, chamber coaching and orchestral training. The conductor Sir 
Simon Rattle is now artist in association with the Barbican and Guildhall.

“We help to prepare students for life as a performer or composer,” says Dr 
Kate Romano, the Guildhall’s deputy head of academic studies. “That is 
incredibly valuable. We want students to be more than excellent players. They 
need to be entrepreneurial, business-minded and able to stand up and talk about 
what they do.

“The industry has changed a lot. It is a big ask to expect people to do all 
those things today.”

Fees for these courses range from £10,550 a year at the Guildhall to £9,700 at 
RCM and £9,000 for theMA in music performance at the University of Chichester 
<http://www.chi.ac.uk/ma-music-performance>. Scholarships are available and 
many students are able to access them.
