
• The canopies of the multistem birch trees are thinned each year to make the 
woodland more transparent, admitting more light so plants underneath can be seen

• The lesser celandine, Ranunculus ficaria 'Brazen Hussy', is from the same 
family as hellebores and anemones, and has bright yellow flowers atop purple 
leaves. Like all good woodlanders, it naturalises quickly

• Acer palmatum 'Sango-kaku' has coral-red bark to rival any dogwood, but has 
a more graceful summer appearance, with bright green, almost yellow foliage 
tinged with red

• Helleborus x hybridus 'Ashwood Garden Hybrids' offer some of darkest purple, 
clearest yellow and most intricately patterned hellebores. Buy plants in flower 
now, so you can pick the best colours

• The snakes head fritillary, Fritillaria meleagris, and its white variety 
will spread by seed and soon naturalise if the soil is moist and well-drained

Woodland gardens typically peak in spring, but The Dell, John Massey's 
canalside garden in the West Midlands, has something to offer all year. In 
winter numerous trees give colour and structure, among them Prunus serrula, 
which Massey jet-washes so the bark gleams. There are also witchhazels and 
dogwoods, but it is the woodland floor that produces an ever-changing stream of 
colour. Early snowdrops and cyclamen are accompanied by 'Ashwood Garden Hybrid' 
hellebores, the result of years of selection from Massey's nursery next door (
ashwood-nurseries.co.uk <http://www.ashwood-nurseries.co.uk>). Next come 
fritillaries, erythroniums and anemones. Then, as spring turns to summer, there 
are orchids, the foliage of the hellebores, corydalis, ferns and purple-leaved 
Ligularia dentata 'Britt-Marie Crawford', which tones things down for a softer 
look that endures into autumn.

Massey stripped and stacked the turf from a piece of flat ground to make a 
free-draining bank, then worked in soil and carved out hollows to make a 
variety of situations. He finds that what he calls "snow melt" plants need lots 
of moisture and good drainage, so an irrigation system was also installed. Each 
year he adds a mulch of old manure and bark to emulate the well-rotted organic 
matter of a wild woodland floor.
