
Although George Bush wasn't at the Republican National Convention, his 
presence was keenly felt, in the form of an ambient pandering to "the average 
Joe". During the 2004 election, much was made of the fact that "the average 
guy" would rather have a beer with Bush than with John Kerry, since Bush was a 
C student who mangled his words, didn't know much about foreign countries and 
sometimes wore a cowboy hat. This idea still pervades US politics, although 
last time I checked, "the average Joe" hadn't had a beer with either Bush or 
Kerry, and in fact had gone from beer to whiskey because his home was in 
foreclosure, and his investments had vanished in the stock market swoon, and 
two of his sons were in Iraq, and he was fading fast because he had cancer and 
no health insurance.

At the convention, nearly every speaker made a point of underscoring his or 
her humble origin. There were a lot of wry shakes of the head at the elitist 
foibles of the Democrats, who'd all been hopelessly corrupted and led away from 
common sense for ever by "their prestigious Ivy League educations" (this to be 
said with a sneer). Suddenly, it was a bad thing to have gone to Harvard and 
Yale. The Republican party, they seemed to be saying, is not just the party of 
the rich. It is, actually, the party of the poor. The poor who, through hard 
work, pull themselves up out of poverty. Yes: the Republicans believe in 
working hard. But not too hard. If one works too hard, one might find himself 
at a "prestigious Ivy League university". This would be terrible. That is where 
elitists like Barack Obama are bred. Obama, to his credit, was originally poor, 
but then screwed it up by going not to a mediocre state college where he did 
only so-so, but to Columbia, one of our finest universities, and then to law 
school at - you guessed it (said with a sneer) - Harvard.

Republicans are, above all, non-elitists. They believe in the primacy of the 
average person. Hence the presence of Sarah Palin on the ticket. She is, we 
heard over and over, a "hockey mom". But this raises a question. If you believe 
in promoting the average over the "elite" (ie the exceptional), why choose 
Palin who, after all, is a gifted speaker, a college graduate, pretty, charming 
- a governor of an entire state, for God's sake - over some less exceptional 
hockey mom who, say, didn't go to college and can't read, and in fact breaks 
into a rash if she even sees a letter of the alphabet, and is hideous to 
behold, and puts her words in random order? That's about as anti-elitist as it 
gets, and would really appeal to "the average Joe", as soon as he stops weeping 
and sobers up a bit.
