
It has been warm and wet, then windy and wet, then cold and wet, then the 
water froze, then it thawed, then it was warm and wet… and on winter’s wild 
furies raged. For some that meant biblical issues; flooding and all its 
detritus spewed over flowerbeds, wrecking gardens and much more. For others it 
was more prosaic; just a garden that wasn’t sure which season it was in.

Initially, there is little to be done with a flooded garden. Sadly, the rule 
is that you shouldn’t eat vegetables that have been covered by flood water, 
even if you cook them.

The soil will be sour: anaerobic conditions mean a lot of the life in the 
soil, the microbes, bacteria and fungi are dead, but they will return. A layer 
of well-rotted compost, homemade or bought, will reintroduce microbes into the 
soil, as well as promoting worm activity. Patience is all you need; once the 
good guys are back on board, they’ll do the work for you.

It is important not to further compact the soil. Wet soil compacts easily 
under foot or heavy machinery. If you have a house to clean up, the state of 
your garden soil may be the least of your worries, but laying down scaffolding 
planks to distribute weight will make a huge difference. If soil has become 
very compacted, some remediation may be needed, particularly around old or 
ancient trees. At the top end, this includes the AirSpade (which forces air 
into the ground at high pressure, to excavate without damaging tree roots); and 
injecting mycorrhizal fungi and fertilisers to boost growth around roots.

Related: Perennial Vegetables: Sow, Grow, Repeat Winter 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2016/jan/23/perennial-vegetables>

As for the changeable weather, December was unseasonably mild. You could see 
that in all the growth: fat swelling buds on trees, daffodils woken early, new 
growth on perennials, all to a soundtrack of spring birdsong. Yet the cold snap 
always comes, eventually. Enviromesh, horticultural fleece and various cloches 
will keep off frost and save confused plants from turning black.

One of the downsides of this is that instead of a steady unfurling of spring 
blooms, you get fits and starts, tattered early daffodils hanging on and torn 
crocus flowers – but perhaps that is being a little picky. The other more 
pressing issue is that much fruit, from apples to soft fruits, need a good hard 
spell to ripen their buds. Also, pests and diseases tend to do much better in 
mild winters; the number of slugs out now is testament to that. There is little 
any gardener can do about this (other than pledging to350.org <http://350.org/> 
to fight climate change).

What is becoming clear is that growing a wide diversity of fruit and 
vegetables is the best way to mitigate changeable weather, particularly by 
growing perennials. A strong healthy root system is perhaps the most important 
tool in making your garden resilient. Fruit and vegetables, such as perennial 
kales, globe artichokes, skirret, asparagus, sea kale, raspberries, 
blueberries, sorrel and elephant garlic, not only have reserves if the weather 
is changeable, but also improve with age. This makes them winners in the 
unpredictable weather game.

 * Alys Fowler has curated a series of Guardian Masterclasses covering garden 
design, foraging, growing cut flowers and fruit and vegetables. Find out more 
and book your place now attheguardian.com/masterclasses 
<http://theguardian.com/masterclasses> 
