
What’s the zeitgeisty look of 2015?

Lifestyle magazines, in the newsagent

People like to mock trend forecasters, those folk who make airy pronouncements 
such as: “This year is ALL ABOUT fuchsia – and nothing else!” But I have an 
enormous amount of admiration for them. Figuring out what a year’s trends were 
in retrospect is an absolute doddle, but to spot them in the moment, well, I 
see that as akin to genius, really. I barely notice where I’m putting down the 
house keys, so having the awareness to ascertain what the look of an entire 
year is while still living in it is as astounding to me as those who can teach 
themselves a foreign language without their brains exploding.

And yet, here I am, instructing myself in the fundamentals of Finnish 
(metaphorically speaking, obviously – I might write about fashion but I’m not 
insane) and reading the runes of the current style trends. Swerving metaphors 
sharply, let us sift through the various valueless pebbles of trends around at 
the moment – cropped tops, midi skirts – to find that golden nugget. And a-ha! 
It is here, at last! And the shining gilded look of 2015 is … dads.

Chances are you have, by now, read about something called “dad bod”. To 
paraphrase the bible of fashion criticism, Zoolander, dad bod is so hot right 
now. Everyone seems to have an opinion on the dad bod, which, as far as I can 
ascertain, is any male body that doesn’t belong to Channing Tatum. Who knew 
such a thing needed a name? Thank God for the internet for providing handy 
nomenclature to things we once did not even notice. Amazing to think we managed 
to muddle through such dark ages for so long before the advent of fashion blogs.

The amount of coverage devoted to the dad bod is so out of proportion to the 
original blog defining the aforementioned Bod 
<http://theodysseyonline.com/clemson/dad-bod/97484> that it frankly boggles my 
mind. This blog, you see, which explains “why girls everywhere are going nuts 
over this body type” (and we are, literally all of us; I can’t even leave the 
house without having a physical meltdown over the thought) contains glittering 
insights such as that the dad bod is “better [for] cuddling”, and “the bigger 
the guy, the smaller and better we look next to you in a picture”. (Excuse me, 
my brain just melted and fell out of my ear.) And yet, despite the 
lobotomy-by-blog tone, the media have gone INSANE over this article, and I use 
that word in the loosest of senses. Sweetly, someonewriting on the Huffington 
Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/allison-underhill/why-the-dad-bod-is-a-sexist-disgrace_b_7418482.html>
 got in a right lather over how the original blog “missed a potential 
opportunity to challenge the societal stereotype that only tall, dreamy, beach 
gods are physically attractive”. Yes, it really is astonishing that a string of 
internet dribble about how women like to feel skinny next to their boyfriends 
did not seize the mantle “to challenge societal stereotypes”, isn’t it?

It is not surprising that dad bod has received so much attention. Men, who 
make up a large proportion of newspaper and magazine editors, are generally 
happy to run articles about how much women fancy guys who won’t ever run the 
risk of being confused with Adonis. And lord knows there are plenty of female 
journalists around, myself very much included, who are happy to write about 
subjects such as sexism and body image, both of which can be dragged into the 
dad bod debate – although, again, “debate” seems like something of a grand word 
for a term that was popularised by a blog about how women choose their 
boyfriends according to who makes them look good in a photo.

But this is not just about dad bod. There is also “dadcore”! That’s right, 
after last year’s seminal fashion trend normcore, there is now dadcore, which 
is, put simply, Normcore, but just for men. Jerry Seinfeld, for example, is 
very dadcore. Anything from Marks & Spencer’s Blue Harbour range is dadcore. 
You might think that these are just clothes, in the way that dad bod is just a 
body, but such scepticism merely betrays your own ignorance. Honestly, how will 
YOU respond when your grandchildren ask in several decades’ time how you marked 
2015, the year of dad-ness? That really puts things into perspective, doesn’t 
it?

One thing I don’t understand, however, is where the dad comes into all this 
dad-ness, if you see what I mean (and, to be fair, it would be understandable 
if you did not). Going back to the dad bod for just a moment, the blog makes it 
very clear that this body does not involve actual dads, but rather “fraternity 
boys skipping gym for a few brews last Thursday”. So in other words, this is 
“frat bod”, not dad bod. Similarly, dadcore seems to refer to clothes worn by 
any male other than Kanye West.

Now, I could work myself up into some kind of outrage about the insistent 
universalising of parenthood, and the grating assumption that any adult over 30 
is either a mother or father and how absolutely outrageous and patronising it 
is. I could, for extra mileage, throw in some comment about the depersonalising 
of parents, by referring to them only as parents and not as individuals. But do 
you know, I think I’ll save those twinkling nuggets for another day and perhaps 
a more worthy subject. Because right now, I’m off to revel in the zeitgeist of 
2015, by which I mean find a boyfriend who makes me look thin. And a blogpost 
to get outraged by. Oh, what a time to be alive!

Post your questions to Hadley Freeman, Ask Hadley, The Guardian, Kings Place, 
90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Email ask.hadley@theguardian.com.
