
What challenges do you face in the mining industry?

I’ve been in the mining sector all my professional life, so the issue of 
gender has always been present.

In the 1980s, I began my career in the UK as one of two girls in a class of 24 
men. I would go underground and you could see that people were shocked: I was 
in a mine and not a miner.

A few years ago, on a trip to a mining site, I was subject to abuse but 
generally discrimination is based on attitude. Often you are made to feel like 
what you are doing is trivial and people make fun of gender initiatives. I sat 
in an interview once and was asked: “Would you choose a team of women or a team 
of men?” A question I refused to answer. Women are not always taken seriously, 
particularly in mining companies.

How unequal is the mining industry?

One could argue that women are excluded from accessing privately-owned and 
regulated mines because of low levels of education. Without simple literary 
skills, women are unable to fill in the licensing form, and are subsequently 
held back from putting a case forward to access finances and own property. They 
start one step behind. Women are on the periphery; sitting outside of the 
mines, selling food or worse, selling their bodies.

With the growth of informal mines, governments must protect women’s livelihood 
opportunities. There is a lack of awareness around women who work in the mining 
sector. It is never talked about and the fault lies in consultation Women are 
not consulted despite being stakeholders. Women are not given a voice and are 
excluded from policies and strategies. I see my role as an advocate for 
sector-wide change. As a respected practitioner, I think people are seeing the 
value in bringing women into the conversation.


To what extent does informal mining neglect safety standards? 

In South Africa, I saw people with no shoes, no helmet and using candles in an 
underground disused coal mine – a hazard, since an explosion could happen at 
any time. People were so desperate they just kept digging to get coal to sell 
despite the site being closed and unsafe.

In Mali, women are working in mining sites with artisanal miners and 
extracting gold by rubbing mercury with their bare hands. I saw a woman sat 
with her baby breastfeeding with one hand and rubbing mercury concentration in 
the other – directly exposing her child to poison. She had no idea of the 
consequences.

You have worked extensively across Africa, do you see the issue of increasing 
female representation as continent-wide, or are some countries making progress?


There is a higher level of awareness in some countries. Tanzania is a model 
for other African countries – the government is really getting involved and 
supporting the mainstreaming of gender through platforms such as the Tanzania 
Women Miners Association. In many other African countries there is so little 
awareness that it is not even talked about, let alone on the agenda.

Mining companies should have a gender equality charter to abide by. Often, 
women drift from technical fields to what is often referred to as ‘softer’ 
skills, such as community affairs. We need more women on the technical side.


Migration has a large impact on employment worldwide. What impact is this 
having on women in mining?

Migration means communities are changing and people from different cultures 
and values are coming together. Cultural beliefs and stigma can heavily affect 
women, particularly in informal mining communities, so women become more 
vulnerable to abuse.

Key areas of development, such as climate change, extractives and governance 
have historically been viewed as gender neutral, or even gender blind. How can 
we close the gender gap? Find outhere 
<https://issuu.com/adamsmithinternational/docs/closing_the_gender_gap_web5_issuu?e=17200343/33243281>
.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Adam Smith International 
<http://www.adamsmithinternational.com/>, a sponsor of the Guardian’s Global 
Development Professionals Network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global-development-professionals-network>.
