
No other industry, I believe, has been more innovative and dynamic than Big 
Pharma. By most measures it is Britain’s most successful research based 
industry. Yet few other industries have faced so many scathing attacks from 
doctors, civil servants, politicians and trade unions.


It employs about 73,000 people, including about 23,000 in research and 
development (R&D), in which it invested £4.2bn in 2012, more than any other 
sector.

No other industry has contributed more to the wellbeing of humankind. For 
example, it has developed antibiotics, asthma treatments, chemotherapy, clot 
busters, oral contraceptives, ulcer medication and vaccines. It has helped to 
save millions of lives, mine included, and improved the quantity and quality of 
many millions more. My life-saving surgery in 1994 would have been impossible 
without modern, long-acting anaesthetics.

But globally it has generated multi-billion dollar fines for malpractice and 
been censored for over-charging – behaviours which admittedly are not unique to 
this industry.

Medicine makers have also concealed thousands of negative clinical trial 
results that would have helped to inform critical treatment decisions. Some 
reports suggest that tens of thousands of deaths could have been avoided in the 
second half of the 20th century if all studies had been reported. These reports 
are disputed by the industry.


Since 2012, pharmaceutical companies have taken proactive steps to publish all 
clinical trial results within a year of marketing authorisation and to publicly 
register all clinical trials within 21 days of enrolment of the first patient. 
An ABPI sponsored study published in 2015 in the journal Current Medical 
Research and Opinion (CMRO) reported that90% of trials approved by the European 
Medicines Authority in 2012 had been disclosed within a year 
<http://www.abpi.org.uk/media-centre/newsreleases/2015/Pages/060515.aspx>. This 
compared with 71% in 2009.

Details of fees paid to doctors, nurses, pharmacists and other healthcare 
professionals by pharmaceutical companies on top of their regular salaries are 
alsoto be published by the industry 
<http://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/18/patients-pharma-payments-doctors-database>
 in the drive for greater transparency. Many companies, for example, hire 
senior doctors to give seminar presentations about their products. This has 
provoked concern that this could sway their decisions about patients’ 
treatment, but the companies – and indeed doctors themselves – insist that the 
practice is a legitimate way to share knowledge about new treatments; and that 
speakers should be paid for their time.

As a medicine watcher of more than 30 years, I find it hard to reconcile 
conspiracy and concealment with the many outstanding people I know in pharma. 
For example, I recall a scientist who has devoted a long working life to 
developing a vaccine against malaria in a multi-million dollar R&D programme. 
He is the kind of role model that should entice young talent with dreams of 
Nobel prizes into the industry. Yet doctors and scientists who leave the NHS or 
public sector research institutes for Big Pharma are sometimes said to have 
moved to the dark side.

There is an inevitable tension between the NHS and the pharmaceutical industry 
arising from a head-on collision between two conflicting ideologies. Once 
described as the best working example of Marxism anywhere in the world, the NHS 
was founded on the social ideal that treatment should be free at the time of 
use. The pharmaceutical industry, in contrast, is a classic example of 
capitalism.

The NHS wants the best possible treatment at the cheapest possible price to 
treat as many patients as possible. The industry, in contrast, wants to 
maximise profits and at the same time find the best cures and treatments for 
patients. Its duty to shareholders is to market itself as powerfully as 
possible.

But at what point does it cross the line between essential profits and 
profiteering? A 100 leading oncologists recently wrote to the journal Blood 
calling for cuts in cancer drug costs. One signatory, Dr Brian Druker, director 
of the US Knight Cancer Institute, asked: “If you are making $3bn a year on 
Glivec (a cancer medicine), could you get by with $2bn?”

The industry says it costs up to a £1bn or more to develop a drug and that for 
every marketed medicine making enough money to pay for its development, 25,000 
compounds are tested. On average, 25 of these go into clinical trials that are 
designed to establish if new treatments are better than standard care. It can 
take up to 12 years or more to bring a drug to market. The multi-billion dollar 
game of pharmaceutical roulette is actually more drip-drip than bang-bang 
although the global pipelines for new medicines are bulging with possible new 
treatments and cures.

The arguments about what is a “reasonable” profit have been going on for 
decades and as with all other industries will continue. But I hope that there 
is no argument that increasing transparency will help to protect patients, 
prevent unnecessary duplication of expensive trials and promote evidence based 
medicine. It may even consign to history the idea that to work for the industry 
is to work for the dark side. Being part of one the world’s most dynamic 
industries should inspire pride, passion for improving patients’ health and 
dreams of glittering prizes.




Content on this page is produced and paid for by the ABPI 
<http://www.abpi.org.uk/Pages/default.aspx>.
