
On the pavement by a bungalow on a residential street near Preston docks Kenny 
Baker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/gallery/2015/dec/16/european-premiere-of-star-wars-the-force-awakens-in-pictures#img-2>
 was standing by a huge blue Rolls-Royce Corniche. “I’ve been to Asda,” he 
said. “A nice lad put my shopping in the boot, but I can’t reach it.”

The car did look monstrous beside Kenny – 3ft 8in and proud of it. This was 
the mid-1990s, and not an accidental meeting; Kenny, then 60, had contacted me, 
a reporter on theLancashire Evening Post, to inquire whether a small man with a 
big car might make a nice photograph.

It wasn’t the first time he’d been in touch: our first meeting, weeks earlier, 
had been the product of an unexpected newsroom call. “Hello!” said a voice. 
“I’m the smallest man in show business and I’ve got the smallest bird in 
Britain nesting in my garden. Would you like to do a story?”

“Who am I speaking to?” I asked, cautiously.

“Kenny Baker.”

So either the jazz trumpeter or…

“R2-D2!” I yelled. “Fidgit from Time Bandits!”

“And an Ewok!” he said. “And a Womble!”

I abandoned whatever local news I was working on. The smallest bird in Britain 
– memory fails but Google suggests a goldcrest – was absent, but Kenny gamely 
posed for photographs, pointing in local-paper fashion at the bird box fixed to 
his garage while I steadied the stepladder out of shot. He showed me the tiny 
piano he used in his pre-Star Wars stage act the Minitones with Jack Purvis (a 
fellow Ewok and Time Bandit), and made me a cup of tea in his kitchen, which he 
navigated via a wheeled library stool. I could barely contain my excitement at 
being offered a chocolate digestive from an R2-D2 biscuit barrel.

At our later meeting I asked how he could drive such a huge car. He showed me 
a pile of cushions on the driver’s seat and blocks of wood taped to the pedals 
– though he was planning to get it properly adapted.

I kept in regular contact with Kenny, ever game for a publicity opportunity. 
One time he posed with a harmonica while standing in the boot of a colleague’s 
hatchback to promote a gig he was playing in nearby Wigan.

After leaving Preston I lost touch with him. In 2005 I read that he was banned 
from driving after being caught behind the wheel, having consumed two glasses 
of wine. Not long after, his beloved Rolls was sold at auction for £13,500.

Now he’s 81, and Kenny’s name appears in The Force Awakens credits as “R2-D2 
consultant”. Presumably no one wants a man his age climbing into a tin-can 
robot for hours on end. But I bet they’d only have to ask.

Star Wars: The Force Awakens is released on DVD on 18 April
