
If ever there could be a personification of the establishment phrase about the 
Great and the Good, the lawyer and academic Patrick Neill, Lord Neill of 
Bladen, was it. Tall and thin, slightly shambling in gait, courtly in manner 
and with a voice that came quietly strangulated from the back of his throat, he 
was the sort of unimpeachable and authoritative figure whom governments consult 
for comfort. In Neill’s case, he also occasionally bit them, as Tony Blair 
discovered when, after Neill was appointed chairman of the committee on 
standards in public life in 1997, he promptly demanded that the Labour party 
should repay the Formula One chiefBernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone>’s million-pound donation, 
which appeared to have been offered in hopes of a commercial favour.

Neill, who has died aged 89, was in turn a commercial barrister and 
arbitrator, judge and chairman of the Bar Council, warden of All Souls College, 
Oxford and the university’s vice-chancellor, as well as chairman of the Press 
Council, among other public posts. How effectively he managed the plethora of 
offices he held, particularly in the City of London, may be open to debate. As 
first chairman of the Council for the Securities Industry (1978-85), he 
favoured self regulation for City institutions, at the Press Council (1978-83), 
he appealed unsuccessfully for tabloids to exercise intelligence and humanity 
and, although he sought increased transparency in political party funding, he 
did not achieve the same for MPs’ expenses.

Neill was born in London, the son of the businessman Sir Thomas Neill and his 
wife, Annie (nee Bishop). Educated at Highgate school, he was commissioned as a 
subaltern in the Rifle Brigade in the last year of the second world war, before 
going to Magdalen College, Oxford, to study law. At university he won the 
glittering prizes of the Gibbs and Eldon scholarships and, after achieving a 
first, won a prize fellowship at All Souls, the wealthy repository of the 
university’s more intellectual eccentrics. Junior members of the college, 
elected by competitive examination from the highest achieving finals graduates, 
are funded and given rooms and dining rights, but are not necessarily expected 
to embark on postgraduate study.

Accordingly, Neill also launched his career as a barrister at Gray’s Inn, 
specialising in patent and commercial law, though he did later also appear for 
the defence in the successful prosecution ofHubert Selby 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/apr/28/guardianobituaries.film>’s novel 
Last Exit to Brooklyn for obscenity in 1967.

Neill might have become a High Court judge, as his older brother Brian did, 
but, although he served as a recorder of the Crown Court for three years and 
was later an appeal court judge in the Channel Islands, he instead returned to 
All Souls in 1972, first as sub-warden, before being elected warden in 1977. 
While the college’s more hidebound customs did not greatly alter, there was one 
notable breach during his tenure, when women were elected to fellowships for 
the first time – though once they arrived, the brave pioneering candidates were 
subjected to both unchecked snobbery and gruesome misogyny from some of the 
fellows.

Neill was head of the college for 18 years and, for four of them, from 1985 
until 1989, was also the university’s vice-chancellor. It was during this time 
that Oxford’s pioneering fund-raising campaign was launched with Neill at its 
head, though not necessarily at its cutting edge. The university needed to 
raise funds to stave off shortfalls in government funding, but had little idea 
how to do it, or even how much it wished or needed to collect. It had no 
tradition of tapping up its graduates or appealing for donations – the colleges 
were reluctant even to allow the university access to alumni addresses – and 
the diffident Neill was much too reticent to gladhand wealthy would-be 
benefactors easily.

Even so, the power of the Oxford name meant that the initial target of £10m 
increased first to £220m and ultimately reached £350m. EvenRupert Murdoch 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> stumped up £3m for a chair in 
language and communication. By that point Neill was also an independent 
director of Times Newspapers. He was less successful in persuading the 
university’s dons to voteMargaret Thatcher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
an honorary degree in 1985 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/january/29/newsid_2506000/2506019.stm>
, or to elect the Conservative historianLord Blake 
<http://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/23/guardianobituaries.books> as 
Oxford’s chancellor in 1987, and when he stood as a candidate forthe same post 
in 2003 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2003/mar/17/highereducation.careers2> he 
too lost – toChris Patten <http://www.theguardian.com/media/lord-patten>.

Meanwhile, Neill was busy with a series of external appointments: it was said 
that if he had divested himself of some of them, he could have halved the 
unemployment rate. Lord Goodman had rated him the brightest young man at the 
Bar and he became in due course a member of the Bar Council, then in 1974 its 
chairman and chairman of the Senate of the Inns of Court.

He chaired committees of inquiry into the Lloyd’s insurance market as City 
scandals emerged. The Council for the Securities Industry under his 
chairmanship proved slow in reining in rogue traders and dawn raiders launching 
pre-emptive strikes on rival companies. Rules were tightened, but largely by 
self regulation, which tended to favour insiders, not investors. As he said 
himself, when appointed to head the Press Council, Neill was not a natural 
crusader: “I do not consider that there are Augean stables to be cleaned out … 
I simply have preconceptions about fairness and the standards that should be 
maintained.” The tabloids did not share his fastidiousness.

It was as a lawyer that Neill was called in by Blair to chair the committee on 
standards in public life in 1997 – the so-called “parliamentary sleazebuster” – 
though his first decision, on Ecclestone’s donation, which appeared to have 
successfully enlisted the government’s opposition to a ban on tobacco 
advertising in Formula One motorsport, was not perhaps what Blair had 
anticipated. The committee nevertheless established guidelines to regulate 
party funding and election expenditure. “What the British public wants is 
openness of information about sources of funding of political parties,” Neill 
declared. “They want to know who is giving and how much and in particular … 
(do) not want money coming from abroad. Political parties should be funded 
here, internally, by donations but not by the state.”

Eyebrows were raised, however, when Neill was found to have accepted the brief 
to represent Shirley Porter, the disgraced former leader of Westminster Council 
over her notorious “homes for votes” policy. He insisted he had merely been 
engaged through the barristers’ cab rank principle and had not noticed a 
potential conflict of interest. Among other committee recommendations was one 
that taxpayers’ money should not be spent on promoting the government case in 
referendums – a sad coincidence that he should die just as it became an issue 
in the current campaign, particularly as Neill had always been deeply 
suspicious of the Common Market, which he held to be an unconstitutional 
infringement on national sovereignty and particularly the European Court: “a 
supreme court with a mission is tyranny”.

Neill was knighted in 1983 and created a life peer in 1997.

His wife, Caroline (nee Debenham), whom he married in 1954, died in 2010, and 
one of their sons also predeceased him. He is survived by three sons and two 
daughters.

• Francis Patrick Neill, Lord Neill of Bladen, born 8 August 1926; died 28 May 
2016
