
Developing countries are grappling with the dual burden of infectious 
diseases, such as malaria and tuberculosis, anda growing epidemic of 
“lifestyle” diseases including type 2 diabetes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/06/who-world-health-organisation-healthier-diets-surge-in-diabetes>
.

As the range of illnesses facing people in low- and middle-income countries 
grows, how should the world prioritise its response? To markWorld Health Day 
<http://www.who.int/campaigns/world-health-day/2016/en/>, we asked students 
which health crisis deserved the greatest attention 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/16/students-speak-whats-the-biggest-health-crisis-facing-the-world>
. We had a fascinating range of responses – many thanks to all who submitted 
one. Below is a selection of our favourites.

If we’re clever, we can tackle many health problems at once

Where there are few stones available, we need to be hitting two birds with one.

Related: WHO calls for healthier diets to combat alarming surge in diabetes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/06/who-world-health-organisation-healthier-diets-surge-in-diabetes>

A better focus would be on strengthening health systems and building 
health-promoting environments that can tackle communicable and non-communicable 
diseases alike, rather than creating fragmented single-disease programmes.

Yes, we should no longer think of type 2 diabetes as a disease of the wealthy 
and, yes, non-communicable diseases (NCD) in low-income settings have certainly 
not been given the attention they deserve. But this new attention need not be 
in the form of fragmented interventions aimed at addressing one specific 
disease or another. Many NCD interventions can be smoothly integrated into 
practices and procedures already in place for prevention and treatment of 
infectious diseases. For example, mobilising and educating community health 
workers can have lasting effects on the control of diseases of both categories.

With mounting global challenges such as climate change, environmental 
degradation and increasingly powerful corporate influences, it seems ever more 
critical to address the determinants of health through comprehensive policies 
and through exploring models of integration both within the health sector and 
with other sectors.

Maybe we should move away from questioning which disease group to focus on, 
and instead ask how we can holistically create systems and environments that 
tackle both. This is not a case of either/or.

 * Alessandra Giusti, Uppsala University, Sweden

The priority should be child and maternal health

Our future lies in the hands of the youth. How can we dream of a brighter 
future when we can’t take care of our youth today?In 2015, 5.9 million children 
under five died worldwide 
<http://www.who.int/gho/child_health/mortality/mortality_under_five_text/en/>; 
that’s 16,000 hopes-for-the-future lost per day. Furthermore,300,000 mothers 
died from mostly preventable causes during or following their childbirth and 
pregnancy in 2014 <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs348/en/>. The 
statistics already move mountains but the scientific evidence will push the 
argument further.

David Barker <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/sep/11/david-barker> 
stated that adverse influences on the child when still in the womb can increase 
the risk of adult-onset diseases such as diabetes and obesity. Additionally, 
improving an infant’s health now, mainly through breastfeeding, improves health 
tomorrow. In the broader perspective, improving maternal and child health 
contributes to achieving development goals and poverty reduction.


There needs to be a global movement to improve maternal and child health 
further if we ever want to start dreaming again. And yes, there is hope. 
Evidence shows that empowering community health workers to provide immunisation 
and other preventive services, treat common illnesses, and deliver nutritional 
education and supplementation, greatly improves maternal and child health in 
resource-poor settings.

Every child deserves to be well and happy.


Indeed, our future lies in the hands of the youth. Today, however, their lives 
lie in our hands. It’s time for us to give them what they deserve. It’s time to 
dream of a brighter future.

 * Jerahmeel Aleson Lopez Mapili, Ateneo de Manila University, Philippines 
Viral diseases can strike anywhere

The past few decades have underlined the ominous threat posed by disease 
outbreaks. Outbreaks of Zika in South America, Ebola in sub-Saharan Africa, HIV 
and Aids in north America, and bird flu in Asia emerged from different points 
of the globe, each one rightly becoming an issue of global concern.

Viral diseases can strike anywhere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/27/global-defence-against-virus-zika-ebola-needed>
, and an epidemic in the right conditions can easily spread to become a 
pandemic. Perhaps then, it is not all that useful to try to separate 
“developing” from “developed” as we do in the case of economics. Health threats 
of this sort require proactive internationalism and rapid coordination, which 
is why a global health campaign would help tackle the issue.

Specifically, I would propose a campaign that aims to develop our global 
surveillance capacity (ie – the universal capacity to recognise and report 
disease outbreaks). After all, our capacity to coordinate effective responses 
depends first on having a well-informed populace who can recognise threats. 
Simultaneously, a well-informed populace lessens the risk of overblown, 
unconstructive panic.

The scariest thing about Ebola was that regional health authorities (and the 
wider populace) were not adequately equipped to identify and respond to a 
disease of epic global significance. Would that have been so different 
somewhere else? Perhaps; perhaps not – but there can be no certainty.

 * Christopher Campbell, University of Sussex, UK

Urbanisation is one of the greatest challenges to human health

Although several global health indicators show a positive trend, progress will 
be hindered by civilisation’s industrial success.

Changing demographics mean more than half of the world’s population now lives 
in cities. The UN predicts the size of megacities to continue growing; 
meanwhile their health hazard is increasing, not only domestically but also 
globally. Indeed, the global health agenda needs to prepare to face its biggest 
and most multidimensional challenge yet: the cost of urbanisation on human 
health.

Pollution and health concerns get drafted in the framework of climate change 
debates, but much more political attention is required. Urban planning needs to 
devote more effort to providing clean water and waste management, particularly 
in informal settlements. New demographics and global connectivity are changing 
the dynamics of disease outbreaks, which require rapid international assistance 
in the heart of those.Levels of air pollution in cities 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/16/winter-smog-hits-worlds-cities-air-pollution-soars>
 are often kept quiet, and their linkage to diseases and gene mutations made as 
vague as possible.

 Meanwhile, it is worth noting the multiple underlying reasons why climate 
change has so far been largely ignored in the context of global health. Its 
prolonged impact is hard to quantify, given that there is no control group, and 
cannot be compared to that of a singular disease outbreak. There is also no 
one-time treatment, which makes it a nuisance for budget planning. Finally, 
outbreaks receive a rapid effective counterblow because of political pressure, 
which often has little long-term effect.

 * Karen Laanem, University College London, UK

Tackle smoking and pollution to combat lung diseases

Respiratory conditions such as asthma and chronic obstructive lung disease are 
among the leading causes of death in developing countries.

The most affected regions are usually those where the quality of breathing air 
is egregiously low. The other cause isunrestricted access to tobacco 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/01/big-tobacco-industry-targets-young-people-poor-countries-smoking>
.

The primary movement towards decreasing the rate of pulmonary diseases in 
developing countries should be done gradually, by elimination of their causes. 
In particular, by reducing air pollution made by cars and factories. How to 
achieve this? Let’s promote exhaust-free transport. Transferring people to 
bicycles and cars with electrical engines, as well as making people use 
sustainable public transport such as natural gas-powered buses, might be 
beneficial.

Also, why not make the cigarette cost unbearably high by applying [higher] 
taxes for each pack of tobacco produced? We could further reduce the number of 
smokers especially among teenagers and young adults with both low and medium 
incomes. Additionally, the income gained from the taxes may be spent on sport 
at schools, medical research and education. Yes, these methods can lead to 
economy loss and job reductions in the tobacco industry, but the medical 
expenses for respiratory disease management will significantly decrease due to 
falling numbers of people requiring treatment.

I believe the work towards elimination of the respiratory disease causes in 
developing countries must be the priority.

 * Alex Savin, TAFE Brisbane, Australia 

To properly address global health issues, we must first address inequality

If I were in charge of global health campaigns I would focus on addressing the 
social determinants of disease – attempting to reduce deprivation andinequality 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/inequality> that lead to 
socio-economically patterned health outcomes in even the richest of countries.

The burden of disease is particularly stark in developing countries, but even 
in richer nations there are challenges. When income is compared with life 
expectancy, there is a clear relationship between material deprivation and poor 
health. However, the returns are diminishing; at higher levels of income, life 
expectancy levels off. Looking at the richest countries, the relationship with 
health is stronger when taking into account economic inequality. In broad 
terms, absolute levels of deprivation are the drivers of poor health in 
developing countries. In richer countries, the relationship is much stronger 
when considering relative measures of deprivation.

In seeking to address global health issues, we should look beyond the burden 
of disease and recognise that the biggest effects will come from looking 
“upstream”. This means looking at issues not traditionally associated with 
health, such as housing, education and employment.

Campaigns focusing on specific conditions or risk factors for disease are 
commendable and necessary. At the same time as treating the causes of ill 
health, we should also treat the causes of the causes.

 * Will Ball, Edinburgh Napier University, UK 