
With respect to our parliamentary colleagues and fellow trade unionists (
Letters 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/dubious-claims-about-the-eu-and-workers-rights>
, 7 June), who are among a small minority of Labour MPs and trade unionists who 
support leaving Europe, it is worth remembering that it was the last Labour 
government that signed up to the European social chapter. It is British 
ministers accountable to our parliament and elected MEPs who make European 
laws, not the European commission. It is curious that anybody on the left would 
trust a rightwing government led by Boris Johnson and supported by Nigel Farage 
in the event of a leave vote. It is factually wrong to suggest that UK law on 
its own underpins these rights. Paid annual leave, rights for agency and 
part-time workers and anti-discrimination laws are guaranteed by EU law, and 
would all be at risk. If we leave the EU, the recession that the Bank of 
England governor has warned about would hit our constituents on low and middle 
incomes the hardest and would mean less money for our public services like 
schools and the NHS. That is why the Labour party is calling on everybody who 
cares about keeping workers’ rights and our future prosperity to vote remain on 
23 June.
Emma Reynolds MP, Ben Bradshaw MP, Pat McFadden MP, Phil Wilson MP, Tristram 
Hunt MP, Rachel Reeves MP, Conor McGinn MP, Mary Creagh MP, Stephen Doughty MP, 
Wes Streeting MP, Julie Elliot MP, Chuka Umunna MP, Adrian Bailey MP, Stella 
Creasy MP, Alison McGovern MP, David Hanson MP, Jamie Reed MP, Ruth Smeeth MP, 
Shabana Mahmood MP, John Woodcock MP, Dan Jarvis MP, Neil Coyle MP, Rushnara 
Ali MP, Liz Kendall MP, Ann Coffey MP, Chris Evans MP, Jo Cox MP, Joan Ryan MP, 
Chris Leslie MP

• Polly Toynbee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/brexiters-leave-remain-labour>
 (7 June) identifies the anger of the underclass, now being bullied into voting 
to shore up the agreeable lives of the comfortably off. Scare stories about 
Brexit do not impress people whose lives are already crushed between newly 
brutal working conditions (Sports Direct, Amazon, zero-hours contracts) and the 
theft of their life chances. Their higher education is priced out of their 
reach, their social housing almost gone, their houses hoovered up into 
buy-to-let portfolios by ABC1s. There is a visceral desire to stick it to 
people who only discover a conscience when their own comfortable lives might 
suffer a slight dent. There is an especial anger reserved for the Labour party, 
the Blair and Brown years spent not in undoing the worst of Thatcherism but 
putting in place all the mechanisms later gleefully seized upon by the Tories 
(NHS marketisation, academy schools, PFI frauds, etc) to complete their project 
to destroy the 1945 settlement. All the Westminster parties appear to despise 
the C2DEs as knuckle-dragging, bigoted racists, so why should they turn out to 
defend an EU that almost exclusively benefits people other than themselves?
John Boulton
Edgware, Middlesex 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
