
First of all, I want to thank everyone for their letters. I don't often get 
the chance to do this, because it's hard to know what to say about letters that 
say Die commie/ fascist whore (especially when you know they're from your 
publisher), but the many notes I have received commiserating with me on the 
recent death of my father were extremely welcome and moving. And I feel much 
better now.

Well, that's over, then - my first Christmas as an orphan. I've still got a 
mother, of course, but she's as bereft without him as I am; two orphans 
together. At six o'clock on Christmas Eve, we cheered, albeit tearily: no more 
Christmas commercials on the TV, no more torment by jollity. From now on, just 
the sales, and he never liked the sales. 'Look at it!' he'd leer, gleefully. 
'Capitalism! Straight off the starting block! God forbid more than a day wasted 
before big business starts cramming people full of rubbish they don't need 
again!'

He liked Christmas, though. His generosity and bossiness came into their own 
at Christmas. So much to give, so much to do! I'll never forget the way he 
cooked the Christmas dinner - you'd call it lunch - which we had at 12 o'clock: 
separate saucepans for everything, then a look at his watch and, 'Right, I'm up 
the top for a pint. Don't touch nothing. Back in half an hour.' I always 
wondered why grown-up women liked to advance the theory that cooking a simple 
meal invariably led to 19 nervous breakdowns; my dad said women were 
temperamentally unsuited to cooking, and that it should be left to men. My 
mother and I were happy to oblige, but that feather-bedding now seems like a 
sword of Damocles as my mother sits staring at a crooner advising her to 'Have 
Yourself A Merry Little Christmas' and I reel around the kitchen trying to 
remember whether sprouts are fried, poached or boiled.

He made everything look so easy. He could have done so much more, if he'd been 
born into a different class, and still made it look easy. I kept thinking of 
him as the Mandelson fiasco unfolded and my dad remarking a year ago that, much 
as he loved Keeping Up Appearances, it was a strange day indeed when the 
stewardship of Keir Hardie's party had been handed to Hyacinth Bucket for safe 
keeping. All those ponces that Mandelson mortgaged his soul to hang out with - 
the great and the good, they call them! But why? So far as I can see, the great 
and the good are in their graves, their bones turned to dust and their party 
become a businessman's bunfight.

'Most people lead very humdrum lives,' Mandelson crassly gave as one of the 
reasons the Dome was needed. But it is he and his like who must lead 
unspeakably dreary lives that they depend for excitement on Domes and dream 
homes. For the rest of us, who engage in profoundly-felt love and politics, 
life is a searing business.

I've already stopped thinking of my dad as some sort of saint, and I like to 
remember the weird and quirky things about him. For instance, on Christmas 
morning, while opening our presents, he insisted that we watch the 
terminally-ill children on TV opening theirs. So you know how lucky you are, 
madam, was the censorious subtext aimed at his somewhat indulged only child 
(moi?). But a rather morbid habit, nevertheless. As he lay dying, just before 
he was taken to the hospice, he shouted at me to 'Go and cancel that satellite 
TV crap, girl! Now!' I started to protest that my mother enjoyed UK Gold - 'Do 
it! Now!'

Why is it that we will do anything, anything, for our families, except spend 
more than three days at a time with them? Why do I roam this house, this 
three-up, two-down dream home - where I spent the best part of my time planning 
my escape - searching for the scent of my hero? In the scullery, I find the 
stations of the cross, the commode and the Zimmer frame he was too weak to use, 
and I place my hands where his must have been. I think of the years, from 12 to 
17, when all I wanted was for him, for both of them, to disappear into the 
ether, for me to be orphaned and then sold into an illegal bigamous marriage 
with David Bowie and Bryan Ferry, who would take turns with me in a log cabin - 
well, I had just seen Paint Your Wagon. They're still here, and embarrass me in 
front of my young friends on TOTP2 every week - 'You fancied THAT?!' - and he's 
gone. He never embarrassed me, but he thought he did, and I can only pray that 
I finally put him right.

In the lead-up to Christmas, the TV seemed to be taunting my mother and me 
with the sheer worthlessness of those left alive. We compare pet peeves; my mum 
says the kid on the Clover ad should be first to get it, but I raise her with 
Ruby Wax squawking as a small child in the supermarket, and we cackle over 
newspaper reports of her nervous trouble. Death has made us nasty, not nicer. 
We hiss at John Cleese yelling in the Sainsbury advert, and console ourselves 
that he sees a psychiatrist, too. And Chris Rea, ceaselessly driving home for 
Christmas: we wish he'd head straight into a pile-up, probably caused by black 
ice. Everyone else just seems like such a waste of space. Except dogs. He never 
met a dog he didn't like.

I stand by the sink, washing up, snivelling. My mum's on Prozac so she can't 
cry, so doing it loudly seems like showing off. Suddenly, I get this picture of 
my dad in my head; he's in Heaven, and he looks around him, and his slow, sly 
smile splits his face as he turns to God: 'You could do it this way. I'm not 
arguing with you, chief! But did you ever think . . .' Suddenly I stop blubbing 
and start to laugh.

I'm really going to try and make this the last column I write about my dad. I 
keep thinking of that Private Eye spoof of the Pakistan elections, in which 
Benazir Bhutto characterised the oppostion as The Bastards Responsible For 
Daddy's Death Party. I have every intention of dedicating the rest of my 
private life to the pursuit of this party, but you may rest assured that by 
next week I will be back on track, chasing the bright, elusive butterfly of the 
zeitgeist. Cheers!
