
We are in the seemingly endless period between my wife Helen’s death and her 
funeral. I’m emotionally and physically exhausted. Days are filled with the 
detail of the funeral and the nights are spent binge-watching. I’m catching up 
on drama that had passed me by, such as the brilliant True Detective and 
documentaries I was never allowed to watch on the big telly in the lounge, such 
as the fine Dambusters Anniversary.

So 3.30am had seen me discovering the brilliant airmanship of the RAF 617 
Squadron bombing the Ruhr dams in 1943. They manoeuvred four-engined heavy 
bombers, at night, fully laden while being shot at, in a way the 
programme-makers couldn’t achieve in a much smaller modern aircraft in 
daylight. The benefit of my new-found knowledge of stall-turns is debatable but 
slumping into sleep on the sofa is preferable to lying awake in a tragically 
empty bed.

“It’s just like the days between Christmas and New Year but without the good 
stuff to look forward to,” says my 14-year-old daughter Millie. I hope she 
means “today” rather than “ever”.

Last night, I watched the whole first series of Broadchurch, finishing at 
3.45am, so this morning I look as white, wasted and unshaven as David Tennant’s 
character, DI Alec Hardy.

I’m standing in the garden staring into space as I wait for the salesman to do 
the recce for the marquee for the guests after the funeral. Thinking about the 
drama, I’m struck hard by something that Susan Wright, the character played by 
Pauline Quirke, says when she is forced to reveal her tragic family history: 
“Once death gets its claws into you, it never lets go.”

Looking back at my own life, I got away with it for a long time. My dad died 
when I was three but I had no memory of him so was not (psychoanalysts might 
disagree) affected by it. By seven, the last surviving grandparent had gone, 
but their deaths had seemed remote. After that I was fortunate to reach my late 
40s without incident or upset, with only the odd infrequently seen aged aunt or 
uncle passing away.

Then, suddenly, Helen is diagnosed with a villainous cancer, my mother dies, a 
school friend and contemporary drops dead on a run, our much loved neighbour 
dies from a cancer she had kept secret for many years and then Helen dies.

I feel that far from being something grim but distant, death is now sitting 
beside me on life’s charabanc. I realise this particularly as Helen’s sister 
Sarah and I go through the logistics of the funeral and none of it is new to me 
as I have done it so recently for my mother.

Millie and Matt come into the garden and start bouncing on the trampoline much 
to the surprise of Harry, our huge kitten who was lying on it. At 14 and 10, 
the kids are more than 30 years younger than I was when death got up close and 
oh so personal. I fear it’ll take a lot for the devastating fact of their 
mother’s death not to be the defining moment or ending of their childhood – a 
very long shadow over their growing up and their lives.

I won’t let this happen. As Helen lay dying, her body peaceful and her 
breathing becoming too shallow, I kept talking and talking, being rewarded with 
gentle squeezes of my hand to let me know she was there. I did not stop even as 
her breathing did, as hearing can be one of the last faculties to end. I was 
able to tell her so much of what she had meant to me. I committed to ensure the 
kids would grow up to be people she would be proud of, their happiness and 
growth uncompromised.

Thank you, Susan Wright (or the writers), for framing this challenge. I need 
somehow to push death off the stage and back into the wings for Millie and 
Matt. A tall order but a target nonetheless and a clear purpose that will 
endure when the distraction of the funeral is passed.

Millie is suddenly beside me and even more than a week before the funeral sets 
our course to a beautifully positive place: “Dad, we’re not going to be the 
family known as the one whose mum died. We’ll be known for what we achieve – 
one that she would have been proud of.”

“Wow. OK then,” I whisper, overwhelmed at her positivity in the face of so 
much that is negative.

The marquee man walks up to us smiling, “So when’s the wedding?”

Adam Golightly is a pseudonym

I committed to make sure the kids would grow up to be the people she would be 
proud of
