
Take a moment to reflect on the over 750 million people who do not have access 
to safe drinking water 
<http://www.wssinfo.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/JMP-2013-Joint-Note-for-media.pdf>
, and the 2.5 billion people who live without basic sanitation.

We take these services as a given in the west, and we've done so for so long 
now that it's difficult to truly imagine life where something as basic as clean 
drinking water isn't just on tap. A world where everyone, everywhere has clean 
water, somewhere safe to use the toilet and has hygiene services. This will be 
a healthier, better educated and more productive world – more productive to the 
tune of$220bn a year 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/water/what-costs-the-world-260-billion-each-year> 
to the world economy.

That's the impact the World Health Organisation has conservatively estimated 
that reaching everyone everywhere with water and sanitation would have. They 
also estimate that a lack of these services iscurrently costing us $260bn every 
year 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/water/what-costs-the-world-260-billion-each-year> 
due to increased healthcare costs, high mortality, school hours missed and time 
taken off from work.

At WaterAid <http://www.wateraid.org/uk> we know that ensuring everyone, 
everywhere has access to water, sanitation and hygiene is fundamental to 
eradicating extreme poverty. We also know that this is an achievable goal. With 
the necessary partnerships in place between government, civil society and the 
private sector, universal access is possible by 2030. This would be a defining 
moment and one of humanities greatest achievements.

In the last decade water stewardship has been rapidly moving up the corporate 
agenda, driven primarily around operational risks associated with securing 
access to sufficient water for their operations. However, the business risks 
associated with unfair and inequitable access to safe water and sanitation for 
communities has been limited.

Water is the ultimate shared and precious resource and we believe that the 
private sector has a vital role to play. This can be through direct service 
provision, championing change as essential for economic development, or as part 
of corporate water management strategies.

Private sector involvement should support national strategies that aim to 
realise the right of everyone to access water, sanitation and hygiene. 
Effective state governance of water resources and pro-poor regulation that 
builds a responsible, sustainable private or public sector water and sanitation 
service is essential for developing economies to function effectively. Without 
it the health and wellbeing of employees, communities and consumers will be 
compromised.

Reputational risks associated with appropriating scarce water resources will 
likely rise as water quality and quantity is compromised, particularly in 
already water scarce regions. Growing under-served urban and peri-urban 
populations are particularly vulnerable, especially in respect of sanitation, 
with consequent impacts for communities and the environment. There are clear 
commercial benefits for taking a holistic and integrated approach to water, 
sanitation and hygiene, in addition to the moral, humanitarian and 
developmental imperatives.

At WaterAid we are campaigning for a water and sanitation goal to be at the 
forefront of the new globalSustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
<http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/index.html> that will be set by the UN in 
2015.

A few companies are showing leadership on this issue and responding to the 
opportunity. Collective action across sectors will be critical to success and 
we urge more in the business community to get involved. We ask that they engage 
with the existing efforts of actors in the water stressed locations they share 
with poor communities.

We challenge the private sector to increase their focus on the water and 
sanitation crisis and ask them to bring their innovation, creativity, knowledge 
and financial investment to help tackle this solvable global challenge.

Dave Hillyard is head of major partnerships at WaterAid

Find out more about WaterAid's Everyone Everywhere 
<http://www.wateraid.org/what-we-do/our-approach/research-and-publications/view-publication?id=b5203641-de28-4c9e-acf1-a511562ead45>
 2030 campaign.

WaterAid is an Anglo American Group Foundation partner, supporting WaterAid's 
work into equity and inclusion. The Foundation currently funds research in 
Southern Africa examining the relationship between access to water, sanitation 
and hygiene and HIV/AIDS.

The water and sanitation crisis, coupled with the HIV pandemic are serious 
problems in Southern Africa with nine of the 10 countries with highest 
prevalence rates worldwide in this region. People living with the virus can 
require as much as five times more clean water than average and are more 
susceptible to infections from poor sanitation and hygiene.

Copy on this page is provided by Anglo American, sponsor of the social impact 
hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/social-impact?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
