
For more than 10 years, I have worked for an organisation that campaigns for 
people with disabilities to achieve equal participation in society. Working in 
Africa, central Asia and currently inPakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, I have seen many examples of 
exclusion and poverty and I realise that I am lucky. I had an accident years 
ago and use a wheelchair and an assistance dog. I don’t feel excluded a lot, 
when I do it is usually because people lack knowledge or somehow my disability 
scares them.

Even when I am upset and angry I need to stay calm, smile, and most 
importantly try not to show how much it hurts

But there is one situation that makes me feel really disabled and excluded – 
when I have to fly. And unfortunately I need to travel a lot for work.Some kind 
of incident takes place on more than 70% of the flights that I take. Sometimes 
it has more impact emotionally, and other times financially and practically.

In more than half of my flights my wheelchair gets damaged, and most of the 
time I don’t get the repair costs reimbursed. Or I arrive to be told that 
someone forgot the wheelchair at departure, and the next flight will only 
arrive a week later, and apparently, it is not the airline’s responsibility 
that I cannot be mobile without my wheelchair.

Related: Live Q&A: How can we build momentum on global disability rights? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/14/live-qa-how-can-we-build-momentum-on-global-disability-rights>

Sometimes you listen to people’s comments and find it funny. There was the 
time that I was blamed for my broken wheelchair, which I should apparently have 
packed and checked in as luggage; I was told that I should have walked and 
waited at the gate for help. Or the times during the emergency drill that I am 
told in case of emergency I need to stay in my seat and not try to leave the 
plane as I will endanger other passengers’ lives. Maybe it is a rule, but it 
does feel like being told that my life is less valuable.

Sometimes I get emotional. Especially after long overnight flights, when the 
person at the support desk tells you that they don’t have enough wheelchairs to 
support the passengers who require assistance and as I am the youngest I can 
walk. And then they say that if I don’t want to walk I will miss my plane, they 
can’t wait for me because that is unfair for the other passengers.


Once I was blamed for my broken wheelchair, which I should apparently have 
packed and checked in as luggage

Or the time that I arrived in a European airport and was told that I wasn’t 
allowed to use an airport wheelchair as they had a rule that persons with guide 
dogs had to walk. When I said I couldn’t walk that distance, and that I had 
been promised a wheelchair as the time between flights was short, the woman 
behind the desk told me she was just following rules. Finally, after a lot of 
discussion and with the help of somebody who had seen that I really do use a 
wheelchair, she dropped me near the gate where I had to wait without a 
wheelchair, which means I couldn’t go to the toilet, get water or food.

Or when people shout at me and refuse to sit next to me, and loudly talk about 
me to flight attendants and all the other passengers. I always wonder if people 
realise what they are saying. I didn’t chose to have a disability.

When I started travelling with an assistance dog, it became even more 
difficult. My assistance dog is the reason I can do my work and travel. I am 
currently travelling with my second dog Wizzard; my retired dog Luca has flown 
more than 200 times. Under International Air Transport Association (IATA) and 
EU regulations assistance dogs (sometimes they only mention guide dogs for the 
blind) are allowed to travel in cabin. However, rules are open for 
interpretation, and many airlines are either not aware of the rules, don’t want 
to follow them or interpret them as they wish. I have been refused boarding on 
several flights after airline staff told me that they have noticed that I am 
not blind and therefore I can’t take my assistance dog on the plane.

Sometimes during the emergency drill I am told not to try to leave the plane, 
as I will endanger other passengers' lives

In fact, if the plane is small, IATA security rules allow airlines to refuse 
me entrance just because I am disabled. And this directly impacts my work, 
because this often happens in countries where small planes are the only 
practical way to travel.

I have had two really unpleasant experiences. The first time I was stuck for 
more than a week in the Gambia when the pilot spotted me and Luca, my black 
labrador boarding the flight back to Sierra Leone. The pilot, for some reason, 
decided the dog was not going to get on the plane, and armed police were called 
to escort me off. It was only after an intervention from my embassy that I was 
able to board a flight, via Europe, back to Sierra Leone.

Related: The moment I felt excluded because of my disability – share your 
stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>

And four years ago a pilot used terrorism regulations to remove me from a full 
plane. All my paperwork was in order, this was a connecting flight, there had 
been no problems on my first flight and I used to fly regularly with this 
airline. But on this flight I was escorted from the back of a full plane to the 
exit in the front by armed police. Both my assistance dog and my passport were 
taken and we were put in a room for more than an hour and told that we were not 
allowed to leave. As I still had my phone, I called my employer and family, who 
put me in touch with the embassy. The explanation eventually offered by the 
airline was that they had made a mistake because of a change of shifts. I was 
informed that I would not be arrested and put on the next flight. No apology or 
further explanation was ever given, and legally there was nothing I could do.

Luckily, 30% of my flights are ok; I have identified airlines (Brussels 
Airlines, Air Namibia, Somon Air and Turkish Airlines) that allow us to travel, 
so at least I can travel for my work. I meet great pilots and airline staff who 
really are helpful and ensure I get support at airports. It is not all bad, 
although I have learned to never believe that I am really going to be flying 
until I am actually in the air.

What bothers me the most is the way it makes me feel and how it also impacts 
on my work. Somehow people feel that I am the one creating the problems, 
because I need to travel with my wheelchair and assistance dog. I find that you 
can’t get angry with people when they refuse you. It makes it harder to 
communicate, so even though I am upset and angry I need to stay calm, smile, 
try not to take the things people say too personally and most importantly try 
not to show how much it hurts. I don’t like to be made feel disabled.

Part of my job is to support persons with disabilities to become empowered and 
included. But am I the right person to do that, when I have accepted that it is 
normal to be treated in a way that makes me upset, unhappy and feel excluded?

Sandra Emons is technical coordinator for Handicap International Pakistan 
<http://www.handicap-international.us/pakistan>.

This week we’re focusing on the issue of disability rights around the world. 
Please get in touch with your experiences, comments and stories; email us at
globaldevpros@theguardian.com <mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com>, putting 
disability rights in the subject line, or add your experienceshere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/08/the-moment-i-felt-excluded-because-of-my-disability-share-your-stories>
.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag #DisabilityRights
