
Raising multimillion-pound mega-gifts is probably the fastest way for a 
charity achieve a step change in its impact. Get it right and your organisation 
could be transformed through one act of philanthropy.

However, the tactics, strategies and timescales involved in attracting this 
size of donation are entirely different from other forms of fundraising. Donors 
who make gifts on this scale would typically have a net worth of at least £50m, 
and very often much more. Philanthropists at this level are rarely motivated by 
altruism alone and to persuade them that they should give to your organisation, 
fundraisers need to think of themselves as strategists who can help position 
their organisations to inspire donors’ enthusiasm.


Get them invested

Securing mega-gifts can easily take three years, and often longer. The 
fundraiser’s role is to choreograph a relationship over this period so that a 
donor’s involvement and commitment deepens throughout, with some carefully 
planned trigger points. It is critical at each stage that the donor’s time is 
being used effectively – no invitations to drinks receptions with warm Pinot 
Grigio and limp canapés please – this is about meaningful work. The goal of 
each meeting should be to secure the next, and so donors must get something 
from each meeting. Listening and possessing high levels of emotional 
intelligence are key ingredients for figuring out what will secure the next 
meeting and moving the relationship forward.

Related: Charities should also target Donor Dave, not just Donor Dorothy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/may/25/charities-fundraising-target-donor-dave-not-just-donor-dorothy>

Know your audience 

There is no room for mistakes at this level and each tactic needs to be 
thought through. You need to know everything about the donor (or as much as 
possible) before ever meeting with them. Research is essential but not as 
important as developing a network of influencers. Of course you need to know 
how much they have given in the past and to which organisation. But to really 
get your proposal right you need to know what their priorities are. What are 
they particularly proud of? What’s worrying them? Who do they trust? Who do 
they admire? Where do they see themselves in five years? You’ll only start to 
understand these things through shared networks, and ultimately direct contact.

Big-gift donors are often surrounded by people whose job is to keep them safe, 
away from difficult situations and stop them overcommitting. This means you’ve 
got to be a master strategist, engaging with donors on their terms. Sometimes 
this means accessing them through influencers in their peer group, sometimes 
this means only inviting them to meet at their favourite restaurant. Each 
cultivation is different and as the fundraiser, your job is to be the expert on 
what motivates them. Powerful people can be demanding and you need to be 
flexible, confident and, above all, tenacious to secure their trust.

What’s the big idea?

Related: How your charity can attract philanthropists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/jan/22/build-relationships-with-philanthropists-fundraising>

One of the most important elements is offering an attractive proposition. Many 
donors are successful entrepreneurs who are experts in recognising 
inefficiencies and developing effective solutions. So be prepared as you enter 
negotiations for your organisation’s own shortcomings to be scrutinised. If 
you’re doing such a good job why do you still exist? Why wouldn’t I just fund 
this directly? Most charities were set up in response to problems and they’ve 
spent a lifetime coming up with solutions. Donors at this level will have their 
own ideas about solutions and they are likely to challenge some of the 
orthodoxy within your organisation. But the biggest gifts are made to charities 
that are prepared to work alongside donors to craft exciting propositions.

Do what you say you will

One of the biggest differences between raising £1m-plus gifts and other forms 
of fundraising is often overlooked. In all the excitement about the gift, 
organisations can gloss over the investment required to implement – spending 
money strategically is harder than you might think. Big gifts are like an 
iceberg: what you see at the proposal stage only hints at the amount of work 
that is to be done once the gift comes in.

 Implementing the project the donor has funded can mean making a fundamental 
change to how your organisation works. The fundraiser might need to secure the 
support of colleagues to deliver the plan the donor was promised.

Making a gift is the donor’s commitment to you, but accepting it is your 
pledge to them. Ensuring your charity over-delivers on the terms of the gift 
and demonstrates results is the most effective way to create happy donors, and 
ones who are likely to give again.

Matthew Ferguson and Gemma Peters will be speaking at the IoF fundraising 
convention in London on 4-6 July 2016. For more information and to book tickets,
click here 
<http://www.fundraisingconvention.uk/?utm_source=GVSN%20website&utm_medium=17June%20Article2&utm_campaign=Guardian>
. GuardianJobs is a media partner.

For more news, opinions and ideas about the voluntary sector, join our 
community <https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/>.
