
I rather like the American expression "fall" for this time of year. It 
describes not just the dropping leaves, but serves as a reminder that we are 
coming to the end of so many home-grown fruits and vegetables and we need to 
catch them while we can. Courgettes, figs, blackberries and tomatoes are cheap 
and plentiful. This month's recipes celebrate the best of our autumn bounty.

Greengage frangipan tart

SERVES 8
For the pastry:
flour 200g
butter 100g
egg yolk 1 
water a little 

For the filling:
butter 100g
caster sugar 125g
eggs 2
ground almonds 125g
plain flour 60g
greengages or small plums 400g

You will also need: 
a round 22cm tart tin at least 3.5cm deep with a removable base
beans for baking blind

Put the flour and butter, cut into small pieces, into the bowl of a food 
processor. Add a pinch of salt and blitz to fine breadcrumbs. If you prefer, 
rub the butter into the flour with your fingertips. Add the egg yolk and enough 
water to bring the dough to a firm ball. The less you add the better, as too 
much will cause your pastry case to shrink in the oven.

Pat the pastry into a flat round on a floured surface, then roll out large 
enough to line the tart tin. Lightly butter the tin, dust it with a small 
amount of flour, shake off any surplus then lower in the round of pastry. Push 
the dough right into the corner where the rim joins the base without stretching 
the pastry. Make certain there are no holes or tears. Trim the overhanging 
pastry and place in the fridge to chill for about 20 minutes.

Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Put a baking sheet in the oven to warm. Line 
the pastry case with kitchen foil or baking parchment and baking beans and 
slide on to the hot baking sheet. Bake for 20 minutes, then remove from the 
oven and carefully lift the beans out. Return the pastry case to the oven for 5 
minutes or so, until the surface is dry to the touch. Remove from the oven and 
set aside. Turn the oven down to 160C/gas mark 3, and return the baking sheet 
to the oven.

To make the filling, using a food mixer cream the butter and sugar together 
till pale and fluffy. Lower the speed, then mix in the eggs and then slowly 
fold in the ground almonds and flour. Spoon the almond filling into the cooked 
pastry case, smoothing it lightly with the back of the spoon.

Cut the greengages or plums in half and remove their stones. Place the 
greengages or plums on top of the almond filling, neatly or randomly as the 
mood takes you. Slide the tart on to the hot baking sheet and bake for 40 
minutes till the filling is well risen and golden brown. Remove the tart from 
the oven and allow to cool slightly before serving.

Baked, spiced tomatoes
 Baked, spiced tomatoes Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
If you cannot find small cans of creamed coconut, then break off 100g of 
coconut cream and make up to 160ml with boiling water.

SERVES 4
large plum or vine tomatoes 8

For the filling:
groundnut oil 1 tbsp
mustard seeds 1 tsp
onions 2, finely chopped
garlic 3 cloves
ginger 3cm piece
chilli 1 red, medium hot 
red or orange peppers 2
ground turmeric 1 tsp
cherry tomatoes 8
creamed coconut 160ml

Warm the groundnut oil in a deep saucepan, cook the mustard seeds till they 
start to pop, then add the onions. Leave to soften and colour while you peel 
and slice the garlic, peel and finely shred the ginger and chop the chilli. Add 
the garlic, ginger and chilli to the pan and continue cooking till the onions 
are pale, golden brown. Core and thinly slice the peppers and stir in. Continue 
cooking over a moderate heat, with an occasional stir, till the pepper starts 
to soften, then stir in the ground turmeric, and the cherry tomatoes, halved.

Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Remove a slice from one side of each large 
tomato (or the top if you are using large vine tomatoes), then scoop out the 
seeds and core from each tomato to give a deep hollow. Chop the filling you 
have removed, discarding any tough cores, and add to the onion mixture. When it 
has cooked down to a soft, brightly coloured mush, pour in the coconut, bring 
to the boil, season with salt, then remove from the heat.

Fill the hollowed-out tomatoes with the mixture, spooning any extra around 
them. Bake for 40 minutes until the tomatoes are soft and fragrant.

Courgette and ricotta tart
     
SERVES 6
courgettes 400g 
olive oil 2 tbsp
puff pastry 375g

For the filling:
ricotta 400g
garlic a large clove
basil leaves 15g
parmesan 75g, grated
eggs 2, lightly beaten
cream 150ml
plain flour 2 heaped tbsp

You will also need: 
a rectangular baking tin (a swiss roll tin) measuring 20cm x 30cm

Slice the courgettes in half lengthways (or in thin slices if you are using 
large ones). Warm the olive oil in a shallow pan then add the courgettes and 
leave to soften over a moderate heat. They should be translucent but still firm.

Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6 and place a baking sheet in the oven. This 
will help the pastry to bake crisply. Roll out the puff pastry and line a 
shallow, rectangular baking sheet, 20cm by 30cm, with it. Put the ricotta in a 
bowl, season with salt and freshly ground black pepper, then peel and crush the 
garlic and add to the ricotta together with the torn up basil leaves, most of 
the grated parmesan and the two lightly beaten eggs, cream and flour.

Spread the ricotta mixture over the pastry in the baking tin, then place the 
cooked courgettes on top. Shake over the remaining parmesan. Bake immediately 
for 30 minutes or until the pastry is golden and the tart has puffed up.

Lettuce and hot bacon salad
 Lettuce and hot bacon salad. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
SERVES 4
For the salad:
mixed salad leaves 4 handfuls 
smoked streaky bacon 8 rashers 

For the dressing:
Dijon mustard 1 tbsp
lemon the juice of half
basil leaves 12 large
egg yolks 2
olive oil 4 tbsp

To make the dressing, put the Dijon mustard, lemon juice, basil leaves and the 
egg yolks in a blender and blitz for a few seconds. Add the oil, slowly, until 
the dressing has the consistency of double cream.

Gently rinse the salad leaves, drain and dry in a spinner. Grill or fry the 
bacon till crisp. Drain on kitchen paper to remove excess fat then snip into 
short pieces. Put the leaves into a salad bowl, add bacon and dressing then 
toss gently together and eat immediately.

Frozen blackberry parfait
 Frozen blackberry parfait. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
SERVES 8
blackcurrants, fresh or frozen 150g
sugar 1 tbsp
water 2 tbsp
shortbread biscuits 200g
shelled pistachios 6 tbsp
vanilla ice cream 900g
blackberries 250g

You will also need: 
a loaf tin or freezer box 22cm long, 12cm wide and 7cm deep, lined with 
clingfilm

Pull the blackcurrants from their stalks and put them in a small saucepan with 
the sugar and water. Bring to the boil, lower the heat and leave for 2 or 3 
minutes till the berries start to burst and the sugar melts. Set aside.

Put the biscuits in the bowl of a food processor with the pistachios and blitz 
till the biscuits are reduced to coarse crumbs – this will take seconds. Take 
care not to over-process – stop while you can clearly see the pistachios.

Let the ice cream soften slightly, then tip into a mixing bowl. Add the 
blackberries and the biscuit and pistachio crumbs and mix gently but firmly – 
the ingredients should be clearly defined. Transfer a third to the lined loaf 
tin, pushing the mixture into the corners but without flattening it too much. 
Spoon in half of the blackcurrants and their juice, then another third of the 
ice cream mixture followed by the rest of the blackcurrants, and the remaining 
ice cream mixture. Cover with overhanging clingfilm. Freeze for 4 hours. 
Unmould, slice with warm knife.

Fig chutney
 Fig chutney. Photograph: Jonathan Lovekin for the Observer 
MAKES 2 LARGE JARS
soft brown sugar 250g
figs 8 large, about 1kg
malt vinegar 150ml
cider vinegar 150ml
onions 250g, roughly chopped
sultanas 250g
salt 1 tsp

allspice 1 tsp
black peppercorns ½ tsp, cracked
coriander seeds 1 tsp

Warm the sugar in a bowl in a low oven. Roughly chop the figs, removing any 
tough stalks, then put them in a large, stainless steel or enamelled pan. Add 
the vinegars, onions, sultanas, salt, allspice, peppercorns and coriander 
seeds, then bring to the boil. Simmer for 30 minutes until the onions and fruit 
are soft.

Stir in the sugar. Place over a low heat, bring slowly to the boil, then turn 
the heat down so the chutney bubbles gently. Leave for 10-15 minutes, with the 
occasional stir to stop it sticking, until the mixture is thick and jam like. 
Bottle while hot and seal.
