
We've got a shed near the house that has a terrible floor made up of rotten 
boards resting on cracked bricks. Whichever way you step, something wobbles or 
breaks. It doesn't take us long to decide what to replace it with. For reasons 
of beauty alone, we're going to have a crack at an earthen floor: they look so 
rich and warm, like a cross between terracotta and leather.

As always, we haven't got much of a clue what we're doing. We attend a few 
three-minute courses at the university of YouTube, chat to some mates and then 
Google about a bit. The first part of the project is easy: we pull up the old 
boards and bricks, and pickaxe down an inch or two. We put in a damp-proof 
course and lay a sub-floor of gravel which, in this abandoned quarry, is in 
rich supply. The floor's about 15 square metres, so it takes an hour or two to 
wheelbarrow the gravel back and forth.

One of the great joys of an earthen floor is that you can almost certainly 
source all the materials from friendly neighbours. The people who own the field 
next to our wood have horses, so we get half a dozen barrows of manure from 
them. We get the clay from a guy a few miles away in Evercreech. The only thing 
we have to buy is the sand – coarse, sharp grit – from Travis Perkins. There's 
no end of alternative ingredients: straw, wood ash, ox blood, psyllium husks, 
flour. Basically anything that binds the sludge together. Just don't try asking 
for ox blood at Travis Perkins. I find they look at you funny.

A few days before doing the floor, we experiment with the mix, trying 
different ratios to see what looks, and dries, best. It all depends on the 
climate: many articles and books from America recommend two or three parts sand 
to one of clay, but we find – in the damp, English autumn – that one to one 
works best, with half a bucket of manure.

We invite round a great guy called Eddie Wills to act as our on-site 
consigliere. Eddie's professional moniker is "Old Boar": he's an environmental 
and archaeological educator who teaches Iron Age crafts. He is also an ordained 
minister of the Church of England and is currently trying to set up an Iron Age 
lake village. So we couldn't have hoped for a better trowel man.

We get the cement mixer turning and discover, through trial and error, in what 
order to add the ingredients: first the hard clay, then a slosh of water to 
loosen it up, then manure – well broken – and finally the sand. The result 
looks and smells wonderful – it's a bit like a gritty chocolate, a deep brown 
with specks of yellow. We simply slop it on to the floor and trowel it out.

Another great advantage of an earthen floor is that there are no health risks. 
There's no danger of respiratory problems or skin reactions. You don't need 
masks or goggles. The drawback, though, is that very soon everything is covered 
in mud. The site begins to look like a trench from the First World War, with 
spades and walls and ladders covered by wet mud. It's also incredibly hard 
work. The mix is very heavy, and because we're doing the surface a bit deeper 
than usual, it takes almost nine hours to cover the entire floor. For one of 
the last batches we ask the children to throw in a 2010 coin for future 
archaeologists. They empty their piggy banks, find one, kiss it and chuck it 
into the mix.

We don't worry about getting the surface perfect yet. We'll let it go off for 
a week or two before dampening it slightly and doing the final skim. And the 
joy of an earthen floor is that it's so forgiving. If anything goes wrong you 
can just add a bit or take some away. It will crack slightly as it dries, so 
will need some "slip" applied. Then it needs to be sealed, a job usually done 
with linseed oil. Since our bees have provided so much wax I'll probably try 
that instead. The total cost will be well under 100 quid.

To read more about Tobias's project, go to 
theguardian.com/profile/tobias-jones or visit windsorhillwood.co.uk
