
Victims of domestic violence will have more support in taking abusive former 
parters to court after the court of appeal quashed restrictions on obtaining 
legal aid in family court cases.

The decision comes after women’s rights campaigners argued large numbers of 
victims were being unlawfully blocked from legal aid, forcing many who have 
endured rape and beating at the hands of their partners to face their abusers 
in court without legal representation.

It means the government will now have to remove the stipulation that people 
applying for legal aid had to produce evidence of domestic violence within the 
previous two years. The former regulations effectively excluded victims who 
have suffered financial abuse, campaigners argued.

Related: Domestic violence victims forced to face abusers in court due to 
legal aid cuts 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/28/domestic-violence-victims-forced-to-face-abusers-in-court-due-to-legal-aid-cuts>

The ruling is a victory for campaign group Rights of Women, which appealed 
against a high court judgment that upheld the changes as lawful. Research by 
the charity had found that 53% of those affected by domestic violence had 
chosen not to pursue cases in the family courts because they could not get 
legal aid.

Emma Scott, director of Rights of Women, said: “Today’s judgment is important 
recognition of women’s real life experiences of domestic violence and means 
that more women affected by violence will have access to advice and 
representation in the family courts.”

At the heart of the case were rules introduced by Chris Grayling, the then 
lord chancellor and justice secretary, that only granted legal aid in family 
law cases to claimants able to show evidence they had suffered domestic abuse 
in the previous 24 months.

Such evidence could include convictions for domestic violence, non-molestation 
orders, evidence from doctors who had treated victims for injuries suffered as 
a result of domestic violence and a number of statutory remedies available only 
to victims who gone through formal routes to escape domestic violence.

“Research has shown that 40% of the women responding to our survey just didn’t 
have the evidence to apply for legal aid,” Scott said. “That means that they 
are stuck with some harsh choices.” Of those who did take, 29% were forced to 
pay for a solicitor privately and 28% represented themselves in court, Rights 
of Women’s research found.

Many others were left with no options at all, she added. “We know that some 
women were staying in violent relationships and not seeking the remedies that 
the law entitled them to.”

In 2014 the high court ruled that Grayling had acted within his powers when he 
introduced the changes. But after a one-day appeal hearing in January, three 
appeal court justices have now ruled that the so-called regulation 33 
“frustrated the purpose of the 2012 act of granting legal aid to victims of 
domestic violence”.

Lawyers for Rights of Women had told the court large numbers of victims are 
being turned away “at the first hurdle” because they have no permissible 
evidence, and had been left with the choice of paying a solicitor privately – 
often resulting in them going into debt – representing themselves, or doing 
nothing and continuing to be at risk.

The Law Society supported the challenge, which was brought by the Public Law 
Project on behalf of Rights of Women. The Law Society president, Jonathan 
Smithers, said: “This ruling means that access to safety and justice will no 
longer be denied to the very people the government expressly sought to protect 
with its amendments to the regulations.”

Polly Neate, chief executive of Women’s Aid, said: “This ruling will at last 
mean women and children get some protection in the family courts. We 
continually hear that survivors and their children are at risk because they 
can’t get legal representation.

“Many survivors are directly questioned by the perpetrator in the family 
court, which would not be allowed in a criminal court – and their fears and 
those of their children are not taken seriously. This can have fatal 
consequences, as shown by the Women’s Aid report Nineteen Child Homicides.

“The law has to recognise that abuse very commonly continues after the 
relationship has ended, so the “two-year rule” for evidence of abuse was 
grossly unfair. We applaud Rights of Women for this victory.”

A Ministry of Justice spokesman said the appeal court judgment would be 
“carefully considered”. He said: “We are pleased the court confirmed the lord 
chancellor did have the power to set domestic violence evidence requirements.

“We will now carefully consider the two findings made about the period of time 
for which evidence applies and concerns about victims of financial abuse. We 
are determined to ensure victims of domestic violence can get legal aid 
whenever they need it. We have made it easier for victims of domestic violence 
to obtain legal aid, by ensuring a broader range of evidence qualifies. This 
has contributed to a 19% rise in the number of grants awarded.”















