
The Russell divorce case, in which the Hon. John Hugo Russell, heir of Lord 
Ampthill, denies the paternity of his wife’s son, and asks for a decree, 
reached the eighth day of hearing yesterday.

Mrs. Hart, the mother of Mrs. Russell, gave evidence. After the marriage, she 
said, no secret was made of her daughter’s dancing and dining with her men 
friends. Mayer (who, with a man unknown, is cited as co-respondent) was a 
business friend who helped her with the dressmaking business.

Sir Marshall Hall (cross-examining): Your daughter was of a somewhat curious 
temperament? - I should not call it curious.

You talk about firmness. Have you ever tried to be firm with her? - I have 
always been firm with her.

Your idea has been to allow her to do what she wanted to do, and in the way 
she wanted to do it? - No.

Have you ever succeeded in imposing your will against her? - I think I have.

A Question of Will Power
Has John Russell ever had a chance of imposing his will against hers? - As 
John Russell, I should say no; as any other man, yes.

To how many people was she engaged in addition to Bradley and someone else? - 
None.

Did you approve of everything she did? - Yes, except that I did not approve of 
her going off with Mr. Bradley.

Nor with going to Paris with a man and staying at the same hotel? - I saw 
nothing wrong in that.

Did you know Russell was jealous of Bradley? - I knew. He was jealous of all 
her friends, and she knew it.

And yet she went on? - Yes; otherwise, she would have had to give up all her 
friends.

Did she tell her husband of all her indiscretions, if only to annoy him? - I 
think it likely.

Was that the terms they were always on? - They were always having tiffs.

Questioned as to Mrs. Russell’s infant, the witness further stated that only a 
few months before the birth of her own first child she was unaware that she was 
going to become a mother. She was “fearfully surprised,” she said, when she 
heard the result of the medical examination of her daughter.

Sir Edward questioned Mrs. Hart about a telephone conversation she had with 
Lady Ampthill at Oakley on Tuesday, June 28, and witness gave the following 
account of it:-

The first thing she said was “Will you please ask John not to write such 
idiotic letters to Chris, as it is very upsetting?” Lady Ampthill replied, “He 
does not mean anything by that, except that she is suffering from some nervous 
disorder.”

The witness replied, “We know it is perfectly ridiculous, as the doctor says 
it’s a baby.” Then Lady Ampthill said, “Jack is not the father.”

“At that answer,” continued Mrs. Hart, “I was perfectly furious. Lady Ampthill 
added: ‘We are now going to put the matter into the hands of our solicitors.’ I 
was furiously indignant, and said to her, ‘It’s the best thing you can do,’ and 
rang off.”

Counsel’s Version of the Talk.
Counsel suggested that Mrs. Hart asked Lady Ampthill if John had told her 
about Chris, and when the reply was “Yes,” she said, “What is John going to do 
about it? It’s simply killing Chris.” Lady Ampthill then said, “That’s 
nonsense.” Then followed, he suggested, some talk in which Lady Ampthill denied 
that the child could be John’s. To that the witness replied, “I hold a letter 
which acknowledges the fatherhood.”

Sir Edward also suggested that the witness said to Lady Ampthill, “Can’t the 
annulment be hurried up?”

Mrs. Hart: It’s most improbable that I should have said such an idiotic thing.

Did not Lady Ampthill reply, “Annulment! When you say it’s Jack’s child! What 
he probably will do is to take divorce proceedings,” and did you reply “Oh, 
divorce! We would rather anybody but John as the father of the child”?

The witness denied this version, maintaining that her own was correct as far 
as she could remember.

Counsel: Do you think your daughter ever did anything to try and please her 
husband? - Oh, yes; constantly.

He used to sit at home like Cinderella and mend the taps and paint the doors, 
and all that kind of thing. (Laughter.)

Mrs. Hart said Lady Ampthill had said: “We often tell John he should beat his 
wife and lock the front door.”

Sir Edward: And if he had beaten her he would not have beaten her again, and 
if he had locked the door she would have got out of the window. (Laughter.)

The case for the wife having been completed, permission was given to recall 
the petitioner, who spoke of his conversation with Mrs. Wellford when he said 
there had been no cohabitation since August, 1920.

The hearing was adjourned.

The Ampthill baby case 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2013/11/the-virgins-baby-by-bevis-hiller-review/> 
was one of the most notorious divorce trials of the 1920s. Christabel Russell, 
who claimed a virgin birth, was convicted of adultery in 1923, though the 
verdict was overturned on appeal by the Lords and her son Geoffrey legitimised. 
Press coverage was so lurid that the law was changed to prevent the reporting 
of divorce cases.

Geoffrey Russell succeeded to the title Baron Ampthill on the death of John 
Russell, though hisclaim was contested 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/03/10/Lord_Ampthill_baby_case_Geoffrey_Russell_Guardian_13_April_1976.jpeg>
.
