
There have always been travellers: hunter-gatherers, nomads, merchants, 
migrants, explorers, crusaders, troubadours and pilgrims. There are still 
business travellers and immigrants, of course, but these days, whether it's a 
journey of a lifetime or an annual holiday, many of the people getting on 
planes, boats and trains are off to somewhere else in search of what they 
describe simply as an "experience", as though no further explanation were 
needed. The desire is for a special experience, for something particular that 
occurs usually far away and happens to or is witnessed by them in person, and 
many places in the world now have much of their economy based on fulfilling 
that desire.

What was I looking for, when I started out at St Pancras, heading for Tromsø 
in the north of Norway, 350km inside the Arctic Circle, in the dead of winter? 
I had a hankering to travel into the darkness and spend some time there, 
looking at the fading light. To go north and see what north really means as the 
light disappears, the temperature drops and the world freezes. But not as an 
explorer - not as Amundsen or Scott struggled with life and death towards the 
poles. Not being in the slightest degree rugged, I went as a modern tourist, 
one of the millions with the time and money to go in search of experience and 
convenience both, a leisurely traveller taking advantage of integrated 
timetables and modern transportation. Though not too modern. I kept my feet on 
the ground, wanting to get a sense of the distance I was going and the 
landscape I was travelling through. So I didn't fly to Tromsø, but took a route 
involving six trains and a ship that took me overland through Belgium, Germany, 
Denmark and Sweden, and farther north by sea, sailing in and out of the fjords 
that wrinkle the coast of Norway.

If you go by train, give yourself time: even spending a night in Oslo wasn't 
enough to take the weariness out of the two days it took to get there. By the 
time I got to the highlight of the train journey - the famous vintage railway 
from Oslo to Bergen, that crossed the snow-covered plateau high in the 
mountains and passed the blue Hardangerjøkulen glacier - I'd grown pretty tired 
of the rhythm of the track. It didn't help that when I settled myself in the 
elegant old train, I found I was between two windows with a blank wall beside 
me and just a foreshortened sliver of view from the window of the seat in 
front. More a tease than a view. I sipped the pretty good coffee from the 
trolley that came round, and sulked. Odd, really, to be disgruntled at not 
seeing out of a window when I wanted to travel in the dark. Eventually, I found 
a buffet coach, without a buffet, but with tables and chairs beside curtained 
windows, and parked myself there for the delirious view of flat white blankness 
surrounded by rough peaks, creeping glaciers and brilliant sunlight sparking 
the snow crystals beside the line. So far, not much in the way of polar night. 
The frozen waterfalls, like suddenly stilled film, had me worrying pleasantly 
but at length about how waterfalls freeze. From the top down? Bottom up? From 
the outside inwards, so that the water still falls for a while inside a 
cylinder of ice?

I got to Bergen in time to board the ship, the MS Trollfjørd, in which I was 
to spend five days threading up into the Arctic Circle towards Tromsø. I'd 
heard of this working ferry, a smallish mail and cargo boat, I imagined, that 
took Norwegians up and down the coast, like a local bus, and also carried some 
tourists. Hopelessly out of date, I discovered. Though a few local people were 
making their way along the coast, most of the 400 passengers (half the ship's 
capacity) were German and English couples and families, with a few evident 
newlyweds who nibbled at each other frequently and gave us older folk a knowing 
pang or two. I was on one of those floating hotels you hear talk of, and I 
confess my heart sank at the sight of the glass lifts running up and down 
amidships to each of the nine decks, the frantically patterned carpets, the 
shop, the cafe, the starry-lit ceilings. I was relieved to find that my room 
was more like a ship's cabin than a hotel room: plain but comfortable, and with 
proper hums, creaking and rattlings to reassure me I was at sea, after all. I 
was even more relieved to discover that however garish the ship looked, 
someone, somewhere understood that this strange, sinuous journey towards the 
pole didn't require piped music or entertainment. The lights on board were 
always dim, especially near the vast, panoramic windows in the viewing lounge, 
and there were plenty of comfortable places to sit, uninterrupted, so that all 
the eerie subtlety of the sun's brief rising at well past 10am and falling back 
below the horizon by 2.30pm could be watched and wondered at. I wanted nothing 
more than to spend a couple of hours every day watching the mysterious 
steel-grey water and the bright and shadowed blue-grey twilight passing by. The 
sea made foamy scurries around rocky disturbances in its way. Great monsters 
slowly appeared in the half-light, towering granite cliffs with crags and 
deformations frosted with ice, and snow nestled in ancient chasms. Smooth 
water, convoluted stone and every shading of mist, cloud and ice kept me 
fixated at the window or on the shockingly windy deck throughout the brief 
daylight hours. I came to appreciate this paradoxically gaudy ship that put 
quiet looking at a high premium.

We passed by thousands of islands and islets, docking frequently, two or three 
times a day. There were organised excursions during the longer stops, but I 
enjoyed just wandering around the harbour, or the town if it was close enough - 
in Ålesund, for example, where the dock was right by the streets of pretty, 
multicoloured, wooden houses with long, thin windows reaching up into sharply 
pointed eaves. The town burned down in 1904 and was rebuilt in art nouveau 
style. Bad luck and good luck - imagine if it had burned down in 1964.

Tromsø, when I finally left the ship, turned out to be a university town, 
permanently set in party mode. Lots of shops, and late at night the thudding of 
dance music coming from club after club. T-shirted men stood in groups smoking 
outside in the -6C, and women in short skirts and high heels teetered 
dangerously along ungritted, ice-covered pavements.

I, wearing as much as possible, went off with five other tourists in the early 
evening with Kjetil Skogli, the guide responsible for helping Joanna Lumley 
find the northern lights on TV. This was what most of the tourists were here 
for - an "experience" of the aurora borealis - and what Tromsø and most of 
northern Norway offered them. It's a brand. The ship called its journey 
"Hunting The Light", and Chasing The Light in his people carrier was Kjetil's 
speciality. Not a phenomenon that happens or doesn't in that part of the world, 
but a quest, a reason for leaving home.

The lights were Kjetil's personal obsession, as it turned out. We started out 
at 6.30pm and he drove at speed away from cloud, snow and city lights, to find 
the clear skies hinted at by various weather instruments. He happily answered 
questions, but otherwise was silently intent on finding the lights in the sky. 
But the promised clear skies were invariably clouded over, and the snow fell 
each time we got to them. We drove fast and furiously along the major roads, 
often crossing our own tracks, until at one point we were just 14km from the 
Finnish border. At 2am we got out for perhaps the fourth or fifth time by the 
side of a road, but on this occasion Kjetil set up his camera. He pointed out a 
streak of northern light, though all I saw was something that looked like a 
very slightly lighter cloud than the rest. But it seemed to please my fellow 
tourists whose determination to experience the lights kept them from freezing 
in the 25-below-zero night. Myself, I'd seen the lights before, and much 
brighter, in Arctic Sweden, but in any case, it was quiet darkness I'd been 
after, rather than a hell-ride quest for green streaks in the sky. How far are 
we from Tromsø, I wondered, a little desperate by then. "You don't want to 
know," Kjetil said. We arrived back in the city at 3am, after eight and a half 
hours of driving and standing by the side of the road looking up at an 
uneventful sky.

The following evening, I went inland again, to take a ride on a reindeer sled 
and have a Sami supper in a lavvu (a kind of tepee). There were two sleds, each 
drawn by a reindeer. Roar led the first with his seven-year-old daughter 
Karoline, and I followed behind on a low, elementary wooden sled, not at all 
like that of the Snow Queen, being pulled silently along a meandering, wooded 
mountain track, in the blazing polar night. The gleaming whiteness of the 
waist-deep, powdery snow lit up the darkness and reflected a brilliant 
quarter-moon and sparkling stars. It wasn't a real journey, like Roar and his 
family make, following the annual migration of the reindeer, but it was a 
jewelled and icy few hours of being allowed a glimpse into another rhythm, 
another way of leading a life. In the lavvu, we met up with others who had been 
dog sledding and light hunting. Craig and Rachel from Leicester had made a list 
of all the things they wanted to do before they die. Seeing the northern lights 
was on it. But why, I wondered, as we ate delicious reindeer soup. "For the 
experience. So I can say I've seen them in person." In fact, Craig was going 
home the next day without seeing the lights. He was philosophical, but his list 
would be incomplete.

"What about you?" I asked Roar. "Is there somewhere you want to go, something 
you want to experience?" He smiled. "I like to be in the forest and mountains 
with my reindeer. There's nowhere else I ever want to be." That was another 
late night, but it felt good sitting in the wood-fire's light, talking quietly 
to people from there and far away. I, at least, felt the journey was 
worthwhile, that very long journey to discover at its end a man who was content 
to stay where he was and experience his own life to the full.

Getting there 

Return from London to Oslo, from £327. To book, call 0844 848 4070 or go to 
raileurope.co.uk <http://www.raileurope.co.uk>. Scenic train from Oslo to 
Bergen, from £31pp, fromnsb.no <http://www.nsb.no>. To sail into the Arctic 
Circle, call Hurtigruten on 020-8846 2666 (hurtigruten.co.uk 
<http://www.hurtigruten.co.uk>). Seven days from Bergen to Kirkenes in March 
costs from £739pp for two sharing.

Stopover 

Oslo. The Grand Hotel, Karl Johans Gate, Oslo, 0047 2321 2000, grand.no 
<http://www.grand.no> 

Stay at 

The Rica Grand Nordic Hotel, Tromsø, nordic.no <http://www.nordic.no>. To 
chase the northern lights or go reindeer sledding, go to
destinasjontromso.no/english/activities.html 
<http://www.destinasjontromso.no/english/activities.html>
