
When Medibank wanted to sell its message that health insurance could be 
tailored to individual needs, the marketing team decided to use real people in 
real situations instead of actors.

This meant steering clear of the white, nuclear family and looking for people 
who represented Australia today. One in three people in Sydney speak a language 
other than English at home and one in three people in Australia today was born 
overseas.

The result was a unique advertising campaign, “i am better”, which embraced 
the diversity of modern Australia and featured people who are often ignored in 
mainstream media and campaigns, including gay dads.

“Traditional private health insurance advertising and marketing almost 
exclusively represents a certain section of society: white, Caucasian, mum, dad 
and the two kids,” says Fiona Le Brocq, Medibank’s general manager brand and 
marketing.

 “We filmed real people in their homes, no hair and makeup, no scripts, which 
is about as real as it gets in advertising. Medibank’s campaign is an honest 
depiction of the diversity of Australia today.”

Le Brocq says the company’s decision to embrace difference in all its forms 
and recognise that people “live and love differently” has paid off in business 
as well as cultural terms. “By far the response to the campaign has been 
overwhelming positive,” she says.

But Medibank’s marketing choices are not commonplace. According to Megan 
Brownlow, editor of PwC’s annual Australian Entertainment & Media Outlook, the 
lack of diversity in Australian media is holding the industry back. Thereport 
found that the average employee working in the entertainment and media sector 
is 27, male, Caucasian 
<https://mumbrella.com.au/bondi-hipsters-media-entertainment-outlook-pwc-report-371575>
 and lives in Sydney’s eastern suburbs or the inner west. The second highest 
concentration of workers in the sector is in Melbourne’s St Kilda and Richmond.

Related: Increased number of women on ASX 200 boards is 'encouraging progress' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/17/increased-number-of-women-on-asx-200-boards-is-encouraging-progress>

“Similar to the world we see depicted by media, entertainment and media 
businesses do not reflect an Australia that’s becoming more diverse by the 
day,” Brownlow said when she released the report. “It’s a case of chicken and 
egg and means the industry is not as well equipped for growth as it should be.

“Studies have shown diversity improves business outcomes. To move the dial in 
the entertainment and media industry, greater focus needs to be placed on 
tackling unconscious bias and similarity attraction in recruitment.”

A former creative director and ad agency owner, Bec Brideson, advises brands 
on the commercial advantage of attracting the female consumer and is devoted to 
challenging stereotypes in advertising. She says that unconscious bias still 
rules the choices brands make in who to represent them in ads.

“There are times in my career where I have put up talent options from 
different ethnicities but big corporates inevitably have that unconscious bias 
of ‘people like us’ and choose the Wasp-y people,” Brideson says. “All white 
boards, shareholders etc and no one wants to challenge tradition of non-diverse 
mindsets.

“It all boils down to the ‘Hollywood gaze’ – the phenomena, where because 
mostly men are the directors or directors of photography, their natural gaze is 
one of a male focus. Same in the boardroom.

“Often agencies are asked to find different ethnicities in stock library 
photography and the problem is just as difficult. Try finding non-cliched 
images of non-white people. Basically impossible.”

The editor of AdNews, Rosie Baker, says the lack of diversity in advertising 
is stark, and was reflected in a2013 study 
<http://www.adnews.com.au/adnews/are-aussie-ads-a-whitewash>, which found that 
more than three quarters of the faces in Australian ads are white.

Although a more recent study is not available, Baker says the situation has 
remained largely the same. “I would say it’s broadly still the case that the 
output doesn’t reflect the diversity of the population,” Baker says. “If you 
look at the statistics they just don’t match up with what you see: they tend to 
be white, middle-class faces in the ads and that’s not what the Australian 
population is.

Baker says most of the blame is at the feet of the creative agencies who cast 
the ads but conservative clients can also play a part.

Related: On-site childcare is a blessing for workers, so why don't more 
companies offer it? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/13/on-site-childcare-is-a-blessing-for-workers-so-why-dont-more-companies-offer-it>

Television advertising is influential in shaping the way the country sees 
itself. Although video consumption online has skyrocketed, television still 
accounts for the vast majority of screen viewing time in Australia – 84.3% – 
even among young people. In the 18- to 24-year-old demographic, 37 hours and 22 
minutes a month is spent watching broadcast TV, according to the 2016Australian 
Multi-Screen Report. 
<http://www.thinktv.com.au/Media/Australian_Multi_Screen_Report_Q4_2015_FINAL.pdf>

With overall advertising spending forecast to reach $18.7bn by 2020, brands 
and creatives would be smart to start looking beyond the stereotype of the 
white Australian traditional family when casting their ads.

But casting is not the only barrier to diversity, according to Thang Ngo, 
managing director ofIdentity Communications <http://identitycomms.com.au/>. He 
says most of the supermarket ads are for products like bread and milk and 
feature families sitting around the breakfast table eating cereal, although 
increasingly the actors have non-white faces.

“All they’ve done is swapped a Caucasian family with a non-Caucasian family 
and that doesn’t speak to diversity,” he says. “It’s only visual diversity. 
It’s like a packet of M&Ms: they are different colours but they all taste the 
same.

“What about showing Chinese new year? Showing diversity is one thing but 
celebrating it is another. Is it not better to celebrate multiculturalism by 
showing Chinese new year and Ramadan?”

Identity, which is part of IPG Mediabrands, works with clients who want to 
target specific ethnicities. The NSW government is a major client, using 
advertising to spread health messages to certain communities, for example.

The director of sales for SBS, Andrew Cook, says he is starting to see some 
categories feature a better representation of Australia “rather than just truly 
white in the way they’re using the talent in their advertising”.

“And we’re also seeing an increase in advertisers wanting to talk to an SBS 
audience, where they were reluctant or they didn’t feel they needed to in the 
past,” Cook says.

Cook says retailers are the first to change, followed by automotive and banks. 
“People realise we have to educate people who are arriving here about 
Australian brands that don’t exist overseas. Every marketer wants to continue 
to grow and you can’t keep talking to the same people year after year. You need 
new people to talk to.”
