
The dilemma My 15-year-old daughter is trying to recover from bulimia. Her 
self-esteem has been low for years, but one thing that’s working is having her 
own horse. My father’s new partner paid for it – she is a wealthy widow and we 
are on the breadline. Enclosed in the birthday card this woman sent was a 
cheque for £80. Straight away my daughter wrote a thank you letter, about how 
this horse will impact positively on her life. Unfortunately she forgot to 
mention the cheque. My father’s partner returned the thank you letter with a 
note saying she was “saddened and disappointed” she hadn’t mentioned the money. 
This was a huge blow to my daughter’s already fragile confidence. When I tried 
to explain the hurt she’d caused she said I should stop this “protective mother 
nonsense” and get her to apologise and to thank her. This woman owns the house 
we live in and I want to move out.

Mariella replies Money is toxic, as you are presently discovering. There is no 
other currency that carries such weight of expectation, causes such stress, 
creates guilty secrets, a sense of privilege and misplaced worth in those with 
plenty, and the total opposite in those without. I read recently that only half 
of married couples know what their partner earns, which really is extraordinary 
when you think about what we’re prepared to share. We share beds, serious 
illnesses, parenting children, buying a home, sexual desires, deep rooted 
secrets, just not what’s printed on our pay slip. We’ll commit to lifelong 
partnership but often keep our bank balance a secret all the way to the grave.

When it comes to those outside our immediate family the shroud of secrecy is 
even more tightly drawn, obscuring detail while thriving on the display of the 
trappings. People won’t tell you what they earn, but they’ll buy ostentatious 
symbols, from cars to designer goods, to hint at the fact it’s a lot. The sense 
of power that money provokes, along with the effortless glide through life it 
promises, are two of its most insidious qualities.

Rationally we know that money doesn’t buy happiness any more than struggling 
in poverty bestows nobility. Today with cheap food and clothing it can seem 
that all elevated finance really offers is a chance to buy the same rubbish but 
pay more for it. I’m sure those working for slave wages in places like Vietnam, 
Cambodia and Indonesia don’t see much difference between a designer bag and the 
copy that sells for a fraction of the price on the streets of Bangkok. Neither, 
if we had any sense, would we.

So many of the world’s woes originate from those who have plenty failing to 
share with those who have not. Worse still, when they do pass out the filthy 
lucre, the actual cost in expectation and manipulation is usually much higher 
than the investment. There’s no swifter way to end a friendship or cause 
disharmony within your family than by borrowing money, and the emotional cost 
of doing so commonly renders the financial relief redundant.

It’s no mystery as to why, either. Money is a form of control, whether it’s 
developed nations lending to underdeveloped countries or, as in your case, 
stepmothers “giving” to their newly accrued family. That’s whydropping the debt 
<http://www.makepovertyhistory.org/whatwewant/debt.shtml> was such a potent 
initiative. What’s the point of squeezing every penny out of a place when the 
net result will simply be to keep them in beholden penury, unless it’s more 
about exerting control than eradicating poverty?

It’s the same with human beings. Even when we can afford to do so, no-strings 
giving seems beyond our capability. It’s why someone likeMark Zuckerberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/02/mark-zuckerberg-priscilla-chan-45bn-pledge-change-philanthropy>
 captures our imagination, a person who’s found that the greatest pleasure 
isn’t how to spend it but how to give it away! And despite appearances, the 
problem isn’t always with the givers. Taking money, no matter how generously 
it’s offered, makes the receiver feel inferior. And even when the lender isn’t 
revelling in that power it’s easy to allow a sense of indebtedness to sour 
relations.

I have no way of telling what sort of donor this woman is. From your 
perspective she’s controlling and insensitive, but maybe her “pound of flesh” 
is simply recognition of her generosity. That’s a small price to pay when 
viewed without the emotional baggage of being in her debt?

I totally understand how a disease like bulimia, also about control and 
powerlessness, might make a parent want to shield their child from the 
vicissitudes of life. But if your daughter is to make a full recovery she needs 
to learn how to operate within the parameters of normal expectation, and when 
someone sends you a cheque, whether it’s for £8 or £80, you send a thank-you 
note. Neglecting to do so is easily remedied and not worth getting involved in 
a stand-off about.

I appreciate you want to protect her from knocks that might propel her back 
into difficulty but building a cotton wool world around her isn’t the way. 
Whether her motives are pure or entirely self-serving this woman deserves your 
gratitude. Biting the hand that feeds is a compelling temptation, but while you 
are relying on that income stream it’s pretty self-destructive. Wouldn’t 
supporting your girl, while teaching her how to negotiate such confrontations, 
be a much more positive way to direct your energy?


If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella at @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
