
David Cameron <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> today 
announced that he has appointed Sir George Young to replace Alan Duncan as 
shadow leader of the Commons.

The Conservative leader said Young was one of the most respected MPs in the 
Commons and that, if the Tories were to win the election, he would bring 
"strength, experience and depth" to a Tory cabinet.

Cameron said Duncan had agreed that the Tory leader was right to demote him 
after it was revealed in the summer that Duncan had complained about MPs being 
forced to "live on rations".

Duncan has left the shadow cabinet, instead taking a more junior post as 
shadow justice minister.

Cameron did not move Duncan when his comments, which were made in what he 
thought was a private conversation, were first broadcast earlier in the summer. 
But today Cameron told Sky News that, having reflected on the matter, he had 
decided that it made sense to replace Duncan with Young.

Young, who was transport secretary in John Major's government, is chairman of 
the Commons standards and privileges committee, although he will have to give 
up that job now that he is rejoining the frontbench. He also stood as a 
candidate for Speaker, getting more votes than all the other candidates except 
for the eventual winner, John Bercow.

After the 1997 election, Young held various posts in William Hague's shadow 
cabinet and was shadow leader of the Commons from 1998 to 2000.

Chris Bryant, the foreign office minister and former deputy leader of the 
Commons, criticised the move. "This is hardly a progressive appointment," he 
said. "George Young's record shows that he is a roadblock to reform whether it 
is on MPs expenses or on any progressive ideas."

The shadow leader of the Commons will have to speak for the Conservative party 
on the issue ofMPs' expenses <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses> 
when the committee on standards in public life publishes its reform proposals 
later this year and it would have been difficult for Duncan to perform that 
role with credibility in the light of his comments.

Duncan also said in the conversation, which was filmed secretly, that MPs were 
being "treated like shit" because the world "has gone mad" after the expenses 
scandal.

Duncan was called to Cameron's Westminster office yesterday and was said to 
have readily accepted his demotion, which will see him take charge of 
Conservative prisons policy under the shadow justice secretary, Dominic Grieve.
 Alan Duncan: demoted. Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex Features 
In a statement last night, Duncan accepted his remarks had made his position 
in the shadow cabinet untenable.

"This is a sensible decision. You have to be realistic about how difficult the 
expenses issue has been. What matters most is winning the election and David 
Cameron becoming the prime minister. I am very happy to get stuck into another 
job," Duncan said.

Cameron made clear last night that Duncan would struggle to make it back to 
the shadow cabinet when he issued a brief statement. "I'm grateful for Alan's 
work as shadow leader of the house and I'm sure he will continue to make a 
valuable contribution as shadow justice minister."

Grieve relinquishes his post as shadow attorney general to concentrate on his 
main job as shadow justice secretary. Grieve will be happy with this change, 
not least because the respected barrister and Tory MP Edward Garnier, who sits 
as a recorder, will take his dream job of shadow attorney general.

Cameron told Duncan that his position in the shadow cabinet was untenable 
after his incautious remarks last month to the blogger and filmmaker, Heydon 
Prowse. Duncan had invited Prowse to meet him at the Commons in June after the 
blogger planted a flower bed in the shape of a pound in his garden in protest 
at the MP's £4,000 claims for gardening. Prowse recorded their meeting at 
Westminster.

Duncan quickly apologised when his comments started circulating.

Cameron has faced criticism in the past for acting slowly. In January 2008, he 
initially decided not to sack Derek Conway as a Conservative MP after a Commons 
committee rebuked him for paying his "all but invisible" son £45,163 to work as 
his research assistant.
