
The former captain of Yale’s basketball team was expelled after a university 
panel found he had sex with a female student without consent, his lawyer 
confirmed on Monday.

Jack Montague, 22, now “intends to sue” the university over his dismissal, his 
lawyer said.

Montague was expelled from Yale on 10 February, kicking off weeks of campus 
unrest over the basketball team’s public support of their former leader during 
the team’s best season in decades. 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/08/yale-basketball-captain-expelled-jack-montague>


On Monday, Montague’s lawyer Max Stern declared his client had become a 
“whipping boy” for Yale’s past behavior regarding campus sexual assault and 
plans to sue.


“We strongly believe that the decision to expel Jack Montague was wrong, 
unfairly determined, arbitrary, and excessive by any rational measure,” said 
Stern.

Making details of the senior’s departure public for the first time, Stern said 
that the allegation came from a female student who was in a relationship with 
Montague in the fall of 2014.


She had previously slept in Montague’s bed and had consensual sex with him, 
but then alleged that on one night the sex was not consensual, Stern said.

Montague denies it was not consensual. After the incident, “she reached out to 
him to meet up, then returned to his room voluntarily, and spent the rest of 
the night in his bed with him”, Stern said.


“We believe that it defies logic and common sense that a woman would seek to 
re-connect and get back into bed with a man who she says forced her to have 
unwanted sex just hours earlier,” Stern’s statement continued.


Thomas Conroy, a spokesman for Yale, declined to speak about the case because 
of privacy laws but noted: “Where cases involve judgments about the witnesses’ 
credibility, all of the available corroborating or contradictory information is 
carefully weighed to determine who is telling the truth.”


The female student reported the incident to a Title IX coordinator – a person 
who handles sex discrimination and sexual misconduct cases when someone wishes 
to lodge a complaint and make changes such as moving classes or housing but not 
necessarily pursue disciplinary action – a year later in fall 2015.

The Title IX coordinator then filed a complaint with the University-Wide 
Committee for Sexual Assault against Montague on behalf of the victim, said 
Stern.


Of the five new UWC formal complaints 
<http://provost.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/February-2016-Report.pdf> 
filed between July and December last year (the most current data available), 
only one was filed by a Title IX coordinator.


That complaint, which is still pending, reads: “A Title IX Coordinator brought 
a formal complaint alleging that a YC [Yale] student engaged in sexual 
penetration of another YC student without consent. No-contact restrictions were 
imposed as an interim measure.”


Yale, like many university campuses across the country, has a problematic 
history with sexual assault allegations. The US Department of Education fined 
the college $165,000 in 2013 for underreporting sexual assaults over a decade 
earlier.


A campus climate survey released in September  
<http://provost.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/WestatReportYaleUniversity-1.pdf>
 showed Yale to have the highest number of reported sexual assaults of all the 
Ivy League universities. Twenty-eight percent of female undergraduates suffered 
sexual assault by force or incapacitation (the criminal definition of sexual 
assault), a figure 5% higher than the average of the 27 other colleges surveyed 
by the Association of American Universities.


Of the 2015 senior class, 46% of females reported sexual assault during their 
time on campus, while 57% of gender non-conforming citizens experienced sexual 
assault. Seven percent of female undergrad students report being raped.

Last year Yale received 134 complaints of sexual misconduct 
<http://provost.yale.edu/sites/default/files/files/February-2016-Report.pdf> – 
the majority being sexual harassment (62) and sexual assault (50). But 
expulsion is rare: only two Yale College students were expelled for sexual 
misconduct in 2015.


Yale’s spokesman said: “Only about one out of 10 cases ends in expulsion, and 
the decision to expel a student is made only after the most careful 
consideration, based on the facts and, when appropriate, disciplinary history.”

“We cannot help but think it not coincidental that the decision by Yale 
officials to seek expulsion of the captain of its basketball team followed by 
little more than a month the report of the Association of American Universities 
(AAU) which was highly critical of the incidence of sexual assault on the Yale 
campus, and the Yale President’s promise, in response, to ‘redouble our 
efforts’,’” Stern said.

In order for disciplinary charges to be placed against a Yale student or staff 
member for sexual misconduct, a hearing is held by the University-Wide 
Committee for Sexual Assault (UWC) where a fact finder investigates the claims 
made and a five-person panel evaluates them and if upheld, recommends a 
punishment. The dean of the school responsible for the respondent then 
implements the penalty.


Stern notes that Montague appealed the decision to the provost office but it 
was upheld.

Last week the Yale basketball team – which just won the Ivy League 
championship and is in the NCAA tournament for the first time since 1962 –
apologized for its public support for Montague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/09/yale-mens-basketball-team-apologizes-public-support-expelled-captain-jack-montague>
, declaring that the team “fully supports a healthy, safe and respectful campus 
climate where all students can flourish”.
