
A soldier who was wrongly identified as her non-identical twin sister, who was 
tried over the death of a seven-year-old girl, has received an apology at the 
high court.

Lance Bombardier Kerry-Ann Morris brought libel proceedings over an article 
published on theNottingham <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/nottingham> Post’s 
website in June 2015.

It concerned the death of Morris’s niece, Shanay Walker, at the home of 
Kay-Ann Morris, her twin sister. She, along with her mother, was convicted of 
child cruelty.

Their trial in April 2015 was attended by Lance Bombardier Morris, who gave 
evidence against them on behalf of the prosecution.

The Post’s article was illustrated by several pictures, including one of the 
lance bombardier, who has been the face of the army’s equality and diversity 
campaign and represents the army in athletics.

The picture caption incorrectly identified Kerry-Ann as her twin sister 
Kay-Ann, against whom she was testifying.

The lance bombardier’s solicitor, Persephone Bridgman Baker, told the high 
court in London: “The meaning of the combined article and photograph is that 
the claimant was tried for murder of a young child in her care and convicted of 
cruelty to that child.

“The article caused the claimant very considerable upset; and she says the 
stress it caused also had a knock-on effect on her ability to work and train to 
the best of her abilities.

“There is, of course, no truth in these allegations. The claimant is an 
upstanding citizen serving her country in the British army.

“The claimant has been stationed in Germany since 2012 and had no part in the 
abuse of Shanay Walker. The claimant was a key prosecution witness in the 
criminal trial of her twin sister and mother.”

Bridgman Baker said the Post’s publisher, Local World 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/local-world> (which is now part of Trinity 
Mirror), acknowledged its mistake and had removed the incorrect photograph from 
its website.

It then made an unqualified offer of amends and published an agreed online 
apology on 25 August 2015 
<http://www.nottinghampost.com/kerry-ann-morris-apology/story-27674369-detail/story.html>
.

The publisher also offered her compensation, which had now been agreed, for 
the considerable reputational harm, distress and hurt caused to her.

Greg Callus, counsel for Local World, repeated its apology to Kerry-Ann Morris 
for the distress and hurt caused.

Source: PA Media Lawyer <http://medialawyer.press.net/article.jsp?id=12358027>
