
Ollie on Ruairidh


What were you hoping for?
Someone with plenty to say for himself who was up for a fun night.

First impressions?
Totally gorgeous.

What did you talk about? 
Our shared tastes in comedy, TV and music, our jobs, and what we wanted to 
achieve in our lives.

Any awkward moments?
He needed to go to the bathroom an awful lot, so there were some awkward 
moments by myself.

Good table manners?
Impeccable.

Best thing about Ruairidh?
His dark sense of humour, and his amazing ginger beard. After a few drinks 
I got to know it more intimately…

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Absolutely. They’d love him.

Describe him in three words
Sexy, funny and smart.

What do you think he made of you? 
That I was a bit of a lightweight on the booze front?

Did you go on somewhere?
Yes! We went to a couple of bars and chatted more over another few drinks. It 
was so much fun.

And… did you kiss? 
We did – more than once. He was a great kisser!

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
He’d have been on time. But it didn’t bother me that much.

Marks out of 10? 
10, without a doubt!

Would you meet again? 
Yes – we already have plans to do so.

Ruairidh on Ollie 


What were you hoping for?
Good company, interesting conversation and a big smile.

First impressions?
Polite, well-mannered.

What did you talk about?
Mainly his work, which was really interesting. I managed to get some good 
gossip about upcoming musicals.

Any awkward moments?
We talked over each other a little to begin with.

Good table manners?
Excellent. He hesitated over what to order in case he’d be messy, which was 
cute.

Best thing about Ollie?
He’s engaging and confident, without being arrogant, which is rare. He’s also 
super-tall, which I really liked. I’ve never dated anyone taller than me before.

Would you introduce him to your friends? 
Yes, absolutely.

Describe him in three words
Funny, interesting, cute.

What do you think he made of you?
I hope he wasn’t put off by me arriving late.

Did you go on somewhere?
To a couple of bars.

And... did you kiss?
A gentleman never kisses and tells. (But we did. Sorry, Mum.)

If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
I’d have arrived on time.

Marks out of 10?
A solid 7. Really good company, but maybe a bit young for me.

Would you meet again?
We swapped numbers…

• Ruairidh and Ollie ate at Piccolino 
<http://www.regentstreetonline.com/zeitgeist/dining-on-heddon-street>, Heddon 
Street, Regent Street Food Quarter, London W1.

Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com 
<mailto:blind.date@theguardian.com>. For a free three-day trial of Soulmates, 
go tosoulmates.theguardian.com <http://soulmates.theguardian.com>
