
Name: Waffling.

Age: Pretty recent; or possibly as old as language; or, in some very real way, 
both.

Appearance: Subtle, but then again, you know it when you see it.

Out with it – what is waffling? A more appropriate question would be: who is 
waffling?

Fine. Who is waffling? David Cameron 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>.

Is he? He was, according to university student Soraya Bouazzaoui, who accused 
the prime minister of waffling 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/david-cameron-comes-under-fire-from-english-student-in-sky-news-showdown>
 in his answer to a question she asked about the EU on a Sky News referendum 
debate.

I don’t understand. She interrupted him and said: “That’s not answering the 
question. I’m an English literature student, I know waffling when I see it.”

So she’s saying that instead of answering the question, Cameron stamped little 
squares into it using an iron or similar implement? No. She was either accusing 
him of talking nonsense, or of deliberately wandering off the point in a 
tiresome bid to avoid answering.

Come, come – which is it? Most likely she meant it in the latter sense, 
although “to waffle” can also mean to be indecisive, ie to flip-flop.

I can’t keep up. When did the young people start abusing the word waffle in 
this way? In about 1701.

What was the general reaction to Bouazzaoui’s accusation? The studio audience 
laughed, Cameron went a bit pink, and Twitter had its usual hissy fit.

And was she right? Was the PM waffling? It depends on who you ask. On the one 
hand, many viewers felt Cameron deserved to be upbraided for his evasiveness. 
But lots of others thought Bouazzaoui rude and a bit of a waffler herself.

What did you think? Me? Well, I think it’s obviously important to strike a 
balance with these things. And also to keep a bit of perspective. If I can just 
return to the origins of the word waffle for a moment, then …

Just answer the question. I have no idea what I think. I was watching the 
football.

It’s people like you who are responsible for the total impoverishment of 
political discourse in this country. You’re worse than Hitler.The funny thing 
is, I could really go for some waffles about now.

Do say: “Forget #wafflegate. Britain’s future is at stake.”

Don’t say: “At least she didn’t say Cameron was toast.”
