
I don’t see myself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/katarina-johnson-thompson> and Jessica 
Ennis-Hill as rivals.I have so much respect for her. We’re two people at the 
top of our game who just happen to be from the same country. I never really 
thought our paths would cross, but suddenly I was a 19-year-old competing at 
the London Olympics. It’s crazy how fast things have progressed for me since 
then.

It’s important that women play sports. It’s great for community and letting 
off steam. Don’t just go to the gym.

I lived a double life growing up. My mum was a dancer and wanted the same for 
me, so she put me in ballet class. I hated it. In school I was a tomboy: I wore 
football kits, played with the boys. Then at the weekend I’d be in ballet 
clothes with my hair in a bun. I’d go outside with a hoodie on, making sure 
none of my friends saw me.

Being the only child of a single mum I matured quickly. I’ve never been 
a naughty kid – I was sensible all the way.

The crowd can push you to do that little bit more, even when you don’t think 
you have anything left. I was doing the 800m in front of 80,000 people at the 
Olympics – my first time in front of a crowd that size – and they were cheering 
and going mental. I remember thinking: “Oh my God, this is amazing! They want 
me to win so much!” It was only afterwards I realised they were cheering Greg 
Rutherford’s winning jump.

Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> is my queen, but I find 
Rihanna more appealing in some ways. My boyfriend [Nick Bright 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00s5l0t>, a radio DJ] slates my taste in 
music, but he’s got a cheesy pop playlist that he doesn’t tell anyone about.

As an athlete, you have to become quite selfish: with your time and your body 
and your training. When I have achieved everything I want to, that’s when I’ll 
be able to give back.

I’ve always been a dog person. I have two dachshunds now: Chorizo and Bronx – 
they’re like my two little mates.

Just because you turn up, it doesn’t mean it’s job done. For a while I was 
just going through the motions with my training, but then I realised that you 
get out of life what you put in, and I needed to work harder if I was going to 
make Rio this year.

I cry all the time, mostly at stupid things. I was watching Deal or No Deal on 
YouTube recently and I bawled when the contestant won £250,000. I think I just 
like watching people achieve their dreams.

Football was taken seriously in my family. My granddad used to mind me at 
weekends, and if the game was on and you wanted to get across the room you had 
to crawl under the TV. So I’ve always been a Liverpool fan, and meeting Steven 
Gerrard was massive for me. He knew who I was before we’d even said hello!

I believe in the supernatural. My dad had been avoiding going to his mum’s 
grave. We finally went there when I was three, and I was playing in the mud or 
whatever and, my mum tells me, I suddenly said: “Take your cap off, boy!” And 
then I went back to playing. That’s crazy, isn’t it?

September is the only month I can drink alcohol and eat what I like. It’s the 
end of the season, and I let the diet go, and drink cocktails.

Hope doesn’t get you everywhere. For a long time I thought it was all down to 
dedication, hard work and visualising doing well – that worked for a bit, but 
then it stopped. I’ve realised you have to be more practical and mature to make 
things actually happen.

Nissan is an official partner of Team GB and supports Katarina 
Johnson-Thompson (betheheartbeat.com 
<https://www.nissan.co.uk/experience-nissan/partnerships/nissan-team-gb-and-paralympicsgb.html#rio2016tickets>
)
