
1. Vegetarian Food Studio 

Few tourists venture down Penarth Road, and those that do could easily walk 
straight past the VFS. Beyond the rather anonymous old shop front, however, 
chef-owner Neil Patel's restaurant is a charming space, simply decorated with 
colourful embroidered tablecloths, religious icons and strings of dried garlic. 
The predominantly (south) Indian food is a big hit with local 
vegetarians/vegans; not only is it filling and cheap, but it's supremely tasty. 
The desi channa is a teasing flavour conundrum, as you try and unpick the 
precise masala spices and seasonings which have transformed a humble mix of 
chickpeas and onions into a such a delicious, soul-stirring dish. The VFS also 
includes a small take-home deli counter stacked with pre-prepared meals and 
glinting "barfi" sweets.
• Snacks/ small meals £3-£5; main curry with rice around £6.70. 109 Penarth 
Road, +44 (0)29 2023 8222,vegetarianfoodstudio.co.uk 
<http://www.vegetarianfoodstudio.co.uk> 

2. Gwdihŵ
 Gwdihw, Cardiff 
Gwdihŵ (pronounced "goody hoo", it's childish Welsh slang for an owl) is one 
of those thoroughly modern venues that seeks to morph effortlessly from slouchy 
daytime hangout to lively late-night bar without missing a beat. After dark, 
live bands and DJs (the DJ booth is created from an old corner cocktail bar) 
bring the noise, but by day the main draw is a compact menu of paninis, salads 
and hot dishes. For tiny bars like this, which don't have a great deal of 
kitchen space, stews are a great and under utilised option. Gwdihw's lentil and 
chorizo number (£5.95) is packed with slow-cooked flavour.
• Paninis from £4.50; hot meals from £4.95. 6 Guildford Crescent, +44 (0)29 
2039 7933,gwdihw.co.uk <http://www.gwdihw.co.uk>

3. Cafe Citta 

This small, discreetly chic, city-centre Italian only opened in December, but 
word of Citta's pizzas – made using their own fresh dough, slathered in a zippy 
plum tomato pulp, and cooked in a wood-fired pizza oven – is spreading fast. 
The menu offers authentic options (such as a thinly sliced potato, rosemary and 
garlic pizza) rather than anglicised toppings, and the pizzas bases have the 
sort of char, chew and spring that marks this out as a serious operation. 
Citta's daytime 9" pizza and salad deal (£5.50) is particularly good value.
• Pasta dishes from £6.50, pizza from £5.95. 4 Church Street, +44 (0)29 2022 
4040

4. Trade Street Cafe
 Trade street cafe, Cardiff 
"Proper food, freshly made," is this busy cafe's succinct, reassuring mission 
statement. Located in a handsome grey stone building amid a warren of offices 
and creative studios, it keeps its regulars happy with a mixture of breakfasts, 
wraps, cakes and daily specials – say, beef and ale pie, chips and gravy 
(£6.25). All are cooked from scratch, on-site, using good-quality Welsh, 
free-range and organic ingredients. That sourcing and the accurate cooking 
lifts even the simplest dishes. The sweet, honey-roasted ham (Trade roasts its 
own) on a breakfast Croque Madame (£3.75) is sliced reasonably generously and 
tastes, refreshingly, of real pig; the fried egg atop is still runny; and the 
Welsh cheddar within is creamy. The rather blank, disinterested service was 
less impressive.
• Sandwiches/snacks from £2.20, meals around £5/6. Trade Street, +44 (0) 29 20 
228 666,tradestreetcafe.com <http://www.tradestreetcafe.com> 

5. The North Star
 The North Star pub, Cardiff 
Recently refurbished in a boudoir aesthetic that even Laurence Llewelyn-Bowen 
might find a bit OTT, this sprawling student-friendly pub (also a comedy and 
music venue) may not strike you as a good place to eat. It all looks a bit 
style over substance. But press on to the bar, because on the evidence of the 
homemade meatballs – coarsely ground, moist, correct fat-to-meat-ratio, covered 
in a vibrant, pulpy Napoli sauce – the North Star kitchen is knocking out some 
good, conscientious stuff. Moreover, its Italian menu, augmented by a weekly 
changing selection of modern British specials (rabbit stew, faggots, slow-roast 
lamb shoulder etc), is good value. Monday to Friday from 12pm to 6pm, there is 
a two-for-one offer on all main meals.
• Starters from £2.90, mains from £5.45. 131 North Road, +44 (0)29 2062 1736, 
thenorthstarcardiff.com <http://www.thenorthstarcardiff.com>

6. Y Mochyn Du

A pleasant 20-minute stroll from the city centre, along Victorian villa-lined 
Cathedral Road, Y Mochyn Du (the Black Pig) is a much-loved pub in an old lodge 
building at the entrance to Sophia Gardens. It's a pretty spot and there is 
plenty of outdoor seating but, needless to say, on the day we visited, it was 
raining. As one local put it, when recommending Y Mochyn Du, it's somewhere 
that offers visitors a distinct "sense of place". Rugby memorabilia lines the 
walls, you'll hear Welsh being spoken at the bar, and the affordable daytime 
snack/sandwich menu features several Welsh dishes (laver bread and cockles, 
bara brith, rarebit). Welsh ingredients, such as Anglesey's Halen Môn sea salt 
and Welsh beef, are also featured throughout. The Mochyn Du's cawl is served 
with some rather pappy sliced white bread, but the lamb and vegetable stew 
itself is good hearty, home-cooked stuff, with a depth of flavour to the gravy. 
There's a decent selection of Welsh ales, too – if it's on, the Otley 01 is 
very good (half, £1.40) – and the staff are winningly friendly.
• Sandwiches/light meals £3.50-£7. Sophia Close, off Cathedral Road, +44 (0)29 
2037 1599

7. Waterloo Gardens Teahouse

A smart, upmarket cafe in a former butcher's shop a mile or so from the 
city-centre, Waterloo is famed for its loose leaf teas and cakes. It serves 
over 50 of the former, all stacked in impressive stainless steel canisters 
behind the counter. Many of these teas have been winners at the Annual World 
Tea Championships and some are exclusive, in the UK, to Waterloo. The majority 
of the cakes are gluten-free and baked by local whiz Jackie Blunt, whose 
repertoire ranges from exotica like chocolate and beetroot cake to a classic 
lemon and poppy seed. We, however, recommend you try a couple of slices of 
thickly buttered bara brith, the rich, traditional Welsh fruit cake.
• Cakes £2.50 per slice, paninis £3.50. 5 Waterloo Gardens, Penylan, +44 (0)29 
2045 6073;waterlootea.com <http://www.waterlootea.com> 

8. Servini's 

A stone's throw from the Millennium Stadium, the central station and many 
local hotels, Servini's is a useful refuge for those keen to swerve the crowds 
on Cardiff's main drags. A neat, traditional family-run cafe (all Formica, 
Sarson's vinegar and chart hits on the radio), it's renowned for its breakfasts 
and hot baguettes, the fillings for which range from spicy merguez sausage to, 
in the "Triple Crown", bacon, onions, mushrooms and black pudding. Servini's 
also does interesting daily specials, like ragu with fresh pasta, and don't 
miss their dense, moist scone-like Welsh cakes (60p, takeaway). Unusually, 
they're baked not with raisins or currents, but with glacé cherries. Purists 
may object, but they taste fantastic.
• Full breakfast £4.50, baguettes from £2.70. 6-10 Wyndham Arcade, +44 (0)29 
2039 4054,servinis-snackbar.co.uk <http://www.servinis-snackbar.co.uk> 

9. The New Conway
 Photograph: Angela Nott 
A spin-off from Woods Brasserie in suburban Pontcanna, this gastropub strikes 
the right balance insomuch as you will still find old fellas mulling over the 
newspapers with a pint in the front bar, while groups of friends and families 
enjoy chef Stefan Nilsson's local, seasonal food (he's big on foraged and 
allotment produce) in the restaurant section. Already listed in Michelin's pub 
guide, the Conway has nonetheless kept a lid on its prices. Budget travellers 
will have to pick and choose from the menu, but better to do that here, where 
the cooking is sharp, than waste money elsewhere. There is a weekday lunchtime 
set menu (two courses of the chef's choice, £10). Otherwise, drop in for a 
"light bite" – a grown-up bowl of wild garlic soup, or cheese and caramelised 
onion tart – or stretch the budget a little with the "Conway classics" menu, on 
which mains like sausage and mash hover around a tenner.
• Starters/light bites from £4, mains from £9.50. 58 Conway Road, Pontcanna, 
+44 (0)29 2022 4373;woods-brasserie.com/conway 
<http://www.woods-brasserie.com/conway>

10. Chai Street

Of late, the biggest talking point on Cardiff's restaurant scene has 
undoubtedly been chef Anand George's Mint & Mustard. A restaurant that claims 
to redefine Indian cuisine, it has certainly redefined local expectations of 
modern Indian food. Chai Street, next door, is George's cheaper, daytime 
spin-off cafe, offering Indian street food with the occasional British tweak. 
Dishes range from light, mildly spiced breakfasts – such as Aurangabad 
toasties, filled with mustard seed and curry leaf infused mashed potato – to 
various thali platters combining meat and vegetable curries, dal, rice, salads 
and breads (from £5). The Chai-to-go menu offers various takeaway snacks, 
including what can only be described as a kind of curry burrito, the Kolkata 
wrap (with drink, £3). The lamb version – the filling is akin to a less rich 
rogan josh – was a little unwieldy to eat whilst walking (the wrap breaks up a 
little too readily), but it was a substantive, tasty snack. Like Chai Street's 
Bollywood-meets-Starsky & Hutch decor, it shouldn't work, but it does.
• Breakfast from £3.50; snacks from £3.50; mains from £5. 132 Whitchurch Road, 
+44 (0) 29 2062 0333;chaistreet.co.uk <http://www.chaistreet.co.uk> 

• Arriva Trains Wales <http://www.arrivatrainswales.co.uk> travel between 
Manchester and Cardiff.First Great Western <http://www.firstgreatwestern.co.uk/>
 run trains from London Paddington to Cardiff Central.
