
What fashion lessons can we learn from Lemonade?

Fashion writers everywhere, IRL

Well, aside from the fact that Bey is so physically perfect she can even make 
clothes by Yeezus look good on her, quite a lot, actually.

It’s hard for me to remember a pop landscape without Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> by this point, but for all her 
longterm omnipresence, she has long seemed somewhat separate from fashion. She 
wasn’t associated with a particular look (like Kylie and her hotpants, say, or 
Missy Elliott and her caps), let alone a designer (Madonna and Gaultier, or 
Rihanna and Riccardo Tisci.) While she always looked good, she didn’t seem 
massively interested in using fashion to speak for her. If anything, her style 
choices seemed as designed to conceal her real self as her notoriously 
close-lipped interviews.

Well, that’s all changed now. The first video that made me think Bey might be 
changing things up a bit was 7/11, which remains one of my favourite of hers. 
The clothes look, on the surface, pretty low-key for a music video – a Givenchy 
sweatshirt here, Forever 21 leggings there, even a Christmas jumper – but they 
felt, for the first time, like Beyoncé was, instead of being her usual 
pop-glamazon self, plugging into the current fashion mood, and making it look 
better than anyone else could.

And now, well. First we had the release of the video Formation, in which Bey 
wears not just recognisable designer clothes butclothes by Gucci 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/feb/08/beyonce-formation-video-fashion-gucci-catwalk>
, the label of the moment, taking on the fashion zeitgeist and making herself 
an inextricable part of it. Now in Lemonade she has done it again, wearing 
clothes from pretty much everyone, from Gucci (again), Alexander McQueen, 
Roberto Cavalli, Hood by Air and, um, Yeezus. Then there are the various 
styles, from southern gothic to Egyptian queen to Victorian antebellum, which 
all become part of the Lemonade’s story about black women.

Lemonade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-lemonade-review-a-woman-not-to-be-messed-with>
 (like 7/11, for that matter) was styled by the brilliant Marni Senofonte, who 
has previously worked with artists such as Brandy, Mary J Blige and – pause for 
a bow before the goddess’s altar – Lauryn Hill, and I could not endorse her and 
Beyoncé’s embrace of fashion more. This isn’t because I give a fig about which 
pop star is wearing which designer, despite the daily thousand emails I get 
from PRs telling me precisely that (what would a day be without 17 emails 
informing me what Pixie Lott is wearing hour to hour?) And it certainly isn’t 
because Bey looked bad before: the woman is clearly the most physically perfect 
being ever born, and that is a scientific fact. Rather it shows her engaging 
with the moment and a willingness to show some of herself, as opposed to making 
perfect if somewhat self-detached pop music. It’s a weird truth, but Bey has 
never seemed more relatable than since she started breaking out the fashion.

And let’s talk about the humanity, shall we? As everyone’s already said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/29/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-explainer>
, Lemonade is about a lot more than Jay Z’s long-rumoured alleged infidelities, 
and that’s clearly true. But hey, it is also about that, so let’s look over 
there for a second. There have already been some pathetic attempts by various 
no-listers to suggest that they are “Becky with the good hair”, only for some 
hilariously quick retrenching on their part once they felt the wrath of the 
righteous Beyhive. Anyone who actually bothers tolisten to the album 
<https://listen.tidal.com/playlist/cb4d7b94-b0fd-4e77-b3ae-cdc32138bd53> could 
figure out that “Becky with the good hair” is not just one woman but a 
composite (“They don’t love you like I do” – the clue is in the second song, 
fools!) I’m more struck by Beyoncé’s term for her husband’s maybe, alleged, 
possible etc etc mistress(es): “Becky with the good hair” suggests, by 
extension, that Beyoncé feels she doesn’t have good hair, as though it’s in the 
tonsorial department that this other woman beats her. The idea of Beyoncé being 
insecure about anything is almost as incomprehensible as the thought of anyone 
cheating on her, but, as I said, she is showing us quite a lot of humanity 
these days.

So there we have it: in Lemonade, Beyoncé shows how she is using fashion both 
to engage with us and also engage us in the issues she’s working through, from 
black feminism to her marriage. She also shows her vulnerability and 
relatability because, dammit, what woman isn’t insecure about their hair? Only 
an evil woman, that’s who. Team Beyoncé! Like there was ever any doubt, anyway.
