
There have been a couple of tins of chickpeas in the cupboard for as long as I 
can remember - so long, they don't register any more when I am rummaging for 
something that might make supper. True, they have their tops dusted and are 
regularly shuffled about, sometimes stacked, sometimes side by side, but always 
with their labels facing out: "Pois Chiches Bouillis, Kichererbsen Gesotten 
240g, best before June 2000" in the hope that this time they might catch the 
cook's attention. It is heartening to know that neither the French nor the 
Germans can come up with a more tempting term for boiled chickpeas than we have.

 The tins were bought, I suspect, because I couldn't bare the thought of 
soaking the dried version for a minimum of 24 hours' then boiling them for at 
least a couple more. Sometimes I forget they are soaking, only to find them, 
several days later, on the point of fermenting. Last time, I let my carefully 
soaked pulses boil dry. It took weeks to get the little buggers' imprints off 
the bottom of the saucepan. Usually rather sniffy about things that come in 
cans, I have found chickpeas are one of the few foods to survive the canning 
process.

 Cece, as the Italians call these Levantine, beige nuggets, are firmly linked 
with peasant cooking. True, the short grey-green plants on which they grow are 
capable of surviving considerable drought and are highly nutritious, but this 
is no reason why they should be the sole property of weather-beaten folk who 
live in the mountains. I am not alone in this thought; the peas have been 
popping up on menus all over London's more fashionable eateries, often as a 
mash.

 Chickpea virgins may find this a good place to start. One of my favourite 
mashes of all time is one I serve with lamb chops. The hot chickpeas are mashed 
with crushed garlic, salt and lemon, then beaten with enough olive oil or 
melted butter to give a sloppy parchment-coloured paste; basically, a home-made 
version of that envelope-coloured pap sold at every deli counter as hummus. The 
point of the dish becomes clear when I put the grilled and still sizzling lamb 
chops at its side, and their clear, glossy brown juices ooze into the chickpea 
puree.

 The Americans often call them garbanzos, a word that makes me laugh, 
especially when said with an exaggerated American accent. It was the Spanish 
who took the pea to the States, and who use it probably more than anyone in 
Europe. Spain has a good, coarse salad, where the boiled garbanzos are tossed 
with olive oil, red wine vinegar, garlic, onion and capers, and a warm one 
where the cooked pulses are tossed with strips of red pepper and fiery chorizo 
sausage.

 One of the best pulse salads I make involves sweating together a handful of 
diced fatty bacon with slightly less of finely chopped onion, garlic, celery 
and parsley until the bacon fat is amber and fragrant; then I tip in the 
chickpeas and leave them long enough to warm through. Still warm, they are 
folded into the mayonnaise with coarse black pepper. It sounds like more work 
than it actually is. Try it for lunch with some very new, white bread and a 
cold beer.

 More than anyone, it is the Indians who have taken this little pulse to their 
hearts and bellies. Known as kabuli channa, they often end up in khatte channe, 
the thick tamarind- and-ginger-spiced soup stew, to be scooped up with puffy 
poori or other deep-fried breads. Like any lentil or bean dish, anything made 
with chickpeas is better the next day. Once hulled and split into two, the peas 
become channa dal, and often appear stewed with turmeric and cumin into the 
gorgeous, fragrant slop that is masala dal.

 In any language, the chickpea makes a hearty soup. Left whole, their texture 
adds body, but surely the best bit is squashing the peas against the roof of 
your mouth. Their bumpy shape is no doubt why Egyptians call them owl's head or 
ram's head peas. Even this romantic connotation hasn't been enough to get those 
tins out of my cupboard.

 These fat, chunky legumes really are at their most interesting when they team 
up with lamb. Rarely is there such bliss in the kitchen. A lamb shank that has 
roasted slowly with red wine, sherry vinegar, onions and thyme produces gravy 
almost as black as treacle. Mash that into a puree of beige pois chiches and 
you're in for the best cold- weather meal on the planet.

 As for hummus, home-made is superior because you can adjust the seasoning and 
level of garlic to your own taste. This ancient dip requires no more effort 
than to drain off the peas, rinse and whiz them to a paste in the Magimix, with 
some garlic cloves and tahini, and lots of lemon juice. It is the sort of thing 
I could do with those tins in the cupboard one Sunday afternoon, then sit by 
the fire, dipping in ragged bits of warm, doughy pitta while I read the paper.
