
There’s no real controversy over the Sun and its “significantly misleading” 
lead headline in March that bellowed “Queen Backs Brexit.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/18/queen-backs-brexit-headline-in-the-sun-was-inaccurate-press-watchdog-rules>
 You only had to read the story to know that it didn’t match the big type: it 
was a thin litter of “impeccable” anonymous sources telling alleged tales from 
a time long before there was any referendum and thus any opportunity to leave 
or remain.

Do you blame editor Tony Gallagher 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/tony-gallagher>, for gritted-teeth bluster in 
the face of Independent Press Standards Organisation condemnation?Je ne 
regrette rien. It’s what he’s supposed to do – and Sun readers can find a more 
rational account on page two. But there is one strand in the verdict worth 
spinning on for a while.

Above “‘Queen Backs Brexit’ was another headline saying “Exclusive: bombshell 
claim over Europe vote.” Gallagher wrote in an editorial last Wednesday: “It 
seemed fair enough to us. Tabloid newspapers like theSun have long made 
eye-catching assertions in headlines alongside a smaller headline to qualify or 
attribute them. It is a standard device.”

Which, alas, seems dismally true of this entire referendum campaign. Bombshell 
shock … Obama backs the Mau Mau … Every family will be zillions poorer …. Isis 
slaughter votes Out for carnage … Hitler inspired Remain campaign. If the 
public, at this point, has anything coherent to say to press and politicians 
alike, it is please put away your “standard devices”. The real bombshell shock 
this June would be weeks of facts, honesty and grey, dispassionate sober 
forecasting – not crazed “eye-catching assertions”.

Who needs Twitter? Not Rupert

Who can define the power of love? You may answer poetically, clinically, 
statistically or, in the case of Rupert Murdoch and Jerry Hall, social 
medially. Once Rupert got hitched, episode four, he suddenly stopped tweeting. 
Love doesn’t need 140 words. Sociability beats any media.
