
My first job in Rome was waitressing in a ristorante in Trastevere. It was an 
odd place, big and plush, proud to be more than a trattoria, but also jaded, as 
if it had seen better days. Jaded and faded, but still able to charm, 
especially on a Friday and Saturday night when the sunken dining room – which 
was downright gloomy in the daytime – was softly lit and filled with voices and 
clinking glasses.


It had a huge menu, which always struck me as a bit of a mess, but what did I 
know? There was pasta galore of course, but what I remember most is bringing 
out these huge wooden boards covered in a very bloody – and bloody delicious – 
beef tagliata, and plates of fish carpaccio. I have clear memories of going 
down the steps, in one hand a lightweight, pale plateful and in the other a 
cumbersome, bleeding board. I was completely lopsided. The owner, who was tiny 
but terrifying, would stare straight into my eye as if to keep me straight.

Related: A masterclass in northern Italian recipes | Feasting 
<http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jul/10/northern-italian-recipes-pork-tonnato-henry-dimbleby-jane-baxter>

Much more interesting, though, were the trays that would arrive every now and 
then. Not from the kitchen, but from the kitchen of the owner’s Neapolitan 
mother, who, as if to confirm all the romantic clichés I was hoping to 
encounter in Italy, cooked up huge, deep trays ofparmigiana di melanzane and 
gattò di patate which her son would bring and serve to customers. The small, 
brick-like slices of goodness-knows-how-much deep-fried aubergine and 
mozzarella, and sunshine-yellow potato cake, seemed so at odds with the 
plushness of the place, like wellies with a nice frock, which is perhaps what 
made them all the more delicious to everyone. Customers who had spurned pasta 
and bread seemed to have no problem with a big piece of egg-and-cheese-laced 
potato. My friend Alice and I would make sure we each secured our slice. We 
kept them behind the bar, and ate them later as we cleared up, possibly talking 
about customers’ plastic surgery.

This is the third week in row that I am writing about potatoes, which is some 
clue as to how much we like and rely on them in this kitchen. Today’s recipe 
for gattò di patate is not from theristorante – which is long gone – it is from 
another Neapolitan, my teacher and almost-neighbour Daniela del Balzo. “Imagine 
a mortar as big as this,” Daniela says, opening her arms in the same way she 
does when she meets me at the market. “Now imagine it filled with potatoes 
which my brother and I have pounded with parmesan until the mixture is soft and
filante” (forming strings). These days Daniela uses a ricer or food mill. I do 
too, thinking of her. I like the idea that even when you are cooking alone you 
aren’t alone; you are cooking with the person who taught you, whether it be a 
relative or friend, a voice in a book or newspaper, or on the telly, and 
perhaps in turn the person who taught them.

To your potato, you add all your New Year resolutions: butter, parmesan, 
salami if you eat it, and four eggs. Mix everything into a cream. You then 
press a layer of this mixture into a buttered and breadcrumb-dusted tin, cover 
that with a layer of mozzarella and smoked cheese, before finishing with 
another layer of potato, which you sprinkle with breadcrumbs, dot with butter 
and bake. This dish brings on comforting waves of cheesy, buttery potato 
nostalgia for me, most of which have nothing to do with Naples.

The quantities below are for a big gattò, which is perfect food for a crowd, 
or you could make this amount into two dishes; one to eat, one for the freezer. 
If you do make a big one, rest assured it is delicious the next day. I warm a 
little butter in a frying pan and then re-heat slice by slice, which gives a 
nice crust. As an accompaniment, I think greens or broccoli ripassati are good. 
If you don’t add salami, sausages could work. I have of course put a fried egg 
on top of a slice, because what isn’t better with an egg on top?!

Potato and cheese bake (gattò di patate)

The recipe below has specific quantities, which you are unlikely to follow 
once you get the hang of this and cook by eye and personal taste. Once you have 
the idea, I think this recipe could lend itself to all sorts of variations – a 
layer of vegetables maybe, and just about any sort of cheese.

Serves 6-8 
1.5kg potatoes, ideally several medium/large ones of roughly the same size
120g parmesan, finely grated
100g butter
A little whole milk
Salt and black pepper
Nutmeg (optional)
100g salami, cubed (optional)
150g smoked cheese, such as provola, or scamorza
200g mozzarella
4 eggs, lightly beaten
Fine breadcrumbs
You will need a large ovenproof dish

1 Scrub, but don’t peel, the potatoes. In a large pan, cover the potatoes with 
cold water, add salt and bring to the boil. Cook at a lively simmer until 
tender to the point of a knife. Drain. Once the potatoes are cool enough to 
handle, peel them, then pass them through a ricer or food mill, or mash in a 
large bowl. Add the grated parmesan, half the butter, eggs, salami if you are 
adding it, milk, salt, pepper and pinch of grated nutmeg and mix well.

2 Use half the remaining butter to grease a large ovenproof dish, then dust it 
with fine breadcrumbs. Press half the potato mixture into the bottom of the 
dish. Dice or thinly slice the provola and mozzarella, then make a layer of 
both on top of the potato. Cover the cheese with the rest of the potato, 
pressing the top down firmly. Sprinkle the top lightly with breadcrumbs and dot 
with the last of the butter. Bake at 180C/350F/gas mark 4 for 40-50 minutes or 
until the top is golden and crusty. Allow the gattò to sit for 10 minutes 
before serving in generous squares. Remember, it is still very good the next 
day.
