
Right at the southern end of the Caribbean chain, nudging the South American 
mainland that it was once a part of, Tobago punches well above its tiny 
dimensions, combining pristine rainforest, rich reefs and spectacular beaches 
with just the right number of small-scale hotels and quality restaurants to 
keep you coming back for more.


Related: Perfect places to stay in Tobago 
<http://www.theguardian.com/discover-tobago/2016/apr/15/perfect-places-to-stay-in-tobago>

With locals and holidaying Trinidadians enjoying its beaches and attractions 
alongside the foreigners, Tobago offers a refreshing alternative to cliched 
Caribbean resorts, with everyone rubbing along happily and an easy-going, 
genuinely friendly feel that’s underpinned by a current of mutual respect. This 
coexistence comes with another huge benefit for visitors: quick immersion into 
the seductively laid-back Tobago lifestyle, where “liming” – simply hanging 
out, often over a drink or food – is considered an essential part of the daily 
routine. Tobagonians also stay true to the bacchanalian spirit in their annual 
events, from quirky Easter crab and goat races
 to the round of harvest festivals that see the island’s villages overtaken by 
street parties.

Tobago is also a knockout in terms of its natural diversity. Unusually for the 
region, coastal development has been kept in check, allowing you to enjoy the 
ravishing tropical scenery without a constant barrage of concrete. The island’s 
greenery-swathed central hills sheer down to glorious coastline on its 
Caribbean or Leeward side, where you can stay in small-scale village 
guesthouses, enjoy fresh local food, and dive or snorkel over reefs frequented 
by manta rays and a rainbow of fish. Along the rugged Atlantic or Windward 
shore, there’s spectacular islet-studded coastline, waterfalls to swim in and 
the chance to sample raw cocoa beans and fine chocolate at a traditional 
estate. The island’s interior, capped by an ancient protected rainforest, 
promises some of the best birdwatching in the Caribbean – and it’s this happy 
combination of unique culture and natural beauty that keeps people returning 
here year after year.

Day trips to Trinidad

Ritzy, urbane Trinidad provides the perfect foil to Tobago’s more casual 
pleasures, just an inexpensive 20-minute flight or 2.5hr fast-ferry ride away. 
All roads lead to Port of Spain, the animated capital, where the street markets 
and urban fizz of downtown give way to the wide-open green space of the Queen’s 
Park Savannah, home to a row of grand old buildings as well as the city’s zoo 
and botanical gardens.

Trinidad’s accessible proportions make Port of Spain the logical base whether 
you plan to visit a Hindu temple in the sea, crashing waterfalls or glorious 
north-coast beaches. Upscale hotels include the Hyatt, set on the Gulf of Paria 
and with knockout views from its rooftop pool; the Carlton Savannah, where 
Queen Elizabeth stayed in 2009; and the Trinidad Hilton, overlooking the 
Savannah. For a more intimate guesthouse, try the standout Gingerbread House, 
set in a beautiful fretworked building.

Trinidadians love eating out: try sophisticated Italian at Buzo, sushi at the 
Hyatt’s Waterfront or Mediterranean fare at Aioli. For local food, try modern 
Caribbean cuisine at high-end Chaud or perfectly executed Trini staples at 
laid-back Veni Mange. You can also pick up delicious snacks such as doubles 
(chickpea curry sandwiched in light fried breads) or split-pea-based corn soup 
sold from ever-present street stalls.

And if you think Tobagonians wrote the book on liming, you’re in for an 
upgrade: Woodbrook’s Ariapita Avenue holds a string of places to dress to the 
nines and sip cocktails, or just kick back in buzzing bars.

How to get there
British Airways flights to Tobago leave from London Gatwick twice a week and 
include a brief stop in Antigua. Once on board, sit back, relax and enjoy their 
complimentary food and drink service alongside the latest in-flight 
entertainment and start your holiday as soon as you step on board. For more 
information, clickhere 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/destinations/trinidad-and-tobago/holidays-in-tobago?ref_site=2016Q2Tobago>
