
Andrew Mitchell <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, the 
former Conservative cabinet minister at the centre of the long-running Plebgate 
saga, lost his high court libel trial on Thursday in a ruling that leaves him 
facing an estimated legal bill of £1.5m and his political career in tatters.

In a devastating blow to the former chief whip, who had hoped to use a victory 
in the courts to revive his cabinet career, Mr Justice Mitting ruled that 
Mitchell did use the “politically toxic” word “pleb” during a row with police 
officers in Downing Street in September 2012.

Mitchell lost his cabinet position, as chief whip, after the Sun reported his 
comments.

Outside the court, Mitchell, flanked by his wife and his daughter, told 
reporters it had been “a miserable two years” but added: “We now need to bring 
this matter to a close and to move on with our lives.”

Friends said that Mitchell accepts that he has no future as a minister, at 
least not under David Cameron. But they suggested that he was still prepared to 
stand again at next year’s general election.

Mitchell sued the Sun over the story that appeared on its front page on 21 
September 2012, in which he was alleged to have launched an offensive and 
arrogant attack on Downing Street police officers who refused to allow him to 
cycle through the main vehicle gates, culminating in him calling one officer, 
PC Toby Rowland, a “fucking pleb”. The MP denied using the words attributed to 
him. Rowland then sued Mitchell for accusing him of lying.

Summing up a two-hour ruling in a silent courtroom, the judge told the court: 
“For the reasons given, I’m satisfied, at least on the balance of 
probabilities, that Mr Mitchell did speak the words attributed to him, or so 
close to them as to amount to the same, the politically toxic word pleb.” In 
his judgment at the end of the £3m joint libel trial, Mitting described 
Rowland, as a “rather old fashioned police officer” who was “well-suited to his 
job” as a member of the Diplomatic Protection Group, and that he believed him.

“He is not the sort of man who had the wit, the imagination or the 
inclination” to “invent in the spur of the moment what a senior cabinet 
minister would have said to him,” Mitting said.

Neither, the judge said, did Rowland have the inclination to “perform the 
pantomime which the invention would require”. Mitting described Mitchell’s 
behaviour as “childish” and found his version of events was inconsistent with 
the CCTV recording from the evening in question. He said of Mitchell, “I’m 
satisfied that he did lose his temper”, adding that the MP’s admission that he 
was “ill-tempered” but did not lose his temper was splitting hairs.

He said that Mitchell, backed by many character witnesses, had said it was not 
in his character to use the word pleb. Mitting said he did not doubt this, but 
he said it was a “common experience of life” that a loss of temper could lead 
to both a loss of inhibition and a loss of recollection.

He said that Rowland’s issuing of an arrest warning to the MP under the public 
order act had no legal basis. He added that gaps and inconsistencies in PC 
Rowland’s account did not demonstrate he fabricated his account, as Mitchell’s 
lawyers had claimed. If he was making up his account, PC Rowland would have had 
to have come up with the words within seconds, according to the judge.

Mitchell had been accused of a pattern of insulting and high-handed behaviour 
with other officers on at least 16 occasions dating back to 2005.

At several points during the ruling it was unclear which way the judgment 
would go. At one stage Mitting said he did not doubt that the words Mitchell 
was alleged to have spoken were “out of character”, while in another he said 
was satisfied Rowland could not have spoken all of the words he said he did.

But by the time Mitting described Rowland as not having the imagination or 
inclination to have invented his account, it was all but over. The MP, at first 
stunned, began to look strained. His wife, her jaw set, began biting her nails.

The libel trial, conducted over eight days in the royal court of justice, was 
a preliminary one to decide on what happened at the gate. Mitchell was asked to 
pay £300,000 costs, which were split between the parties, by 3 January 2015. 
But further legal costs will follow.

Desmond Browne QC, for Rowland, said that the judge’s findings that the word 
pleb had been used was determinative of the entire litigation and that any 
defence of qualified privilege or honest opinion had “no hope at all”. He said 
Mitchell was the “architect of his own misfortune”.

Stig Abell, managing editor of the Sun, said: “There has been a lot of 
speculation and comment about Mr Mitchell’s outburst, and criticism of our 
newspaper. The judgment today lays all that to rest. Our article broke this 
important public interest story, and it has been independently and conclusively 
confirmed. The Sun can be proud of its journalism today.”

Mitchell’s counsel, James Price QC, had claimed that a “web of lies, deceit 
and indiscipline” by police officers led to a press campaign and public 
hostility, and the version of the encounter which was leaked to the newspaper 
by a number of officers was “wholly false”. “In the end, the lies brought Mr 
Mitchell down, destroying a political career of 27 years,” he said.

The police officer vindicated by the Plebgate trial said the two year period 
had been “the very worst of times”.

Rowland was supported in bringing his libel action by the Police 
<http://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Federation, which insiders claim has run 
up more than £980,000 in costs. Rowland said on Thursday: “It is with huge 
regret that what happened at the gates of Downing Street more than two years 
ago has ended up here.

“It should be pointed out that I and my team tried everything possible to stop 
the need for court action.”

Rowland added: “Even before this trial began, I had already been cleared of 
any wrongdoing by four extensive and wide-reaching investigations including a 
criminal one.

“I am delighted that here again my innocence, integrity and reputation as a 
police officer has been recognised.

“The pain me and my family have been through is indescribable and it is 
particularly saddening that all this happened because I was following 
procedure, and simply doing my job without fear or favour. I also recognise how 
difficult it must have been for Mr Mitchell’s family and I hope now that a line 
can be drawn and everyone can be left in peace.”

Before the trial all sides had attended mediation to try and avoid a trial, 
and the costs and the risks involve.

Steve White, chairman of the Police Federation said: “We are pleased that the 
judge has ruled in PC Toby Rowland’s favour. Toby’s name has been cleared and 
his integrity restored. Toby has conducted himself with dignity and 
professionalism in relation to this incident and subsequent enquiries and legal 
cases. It is important that this incident is now brought to a close to allow 
Toby and his family to look to the future.”

There were holes in Mitchell’s story

Giving his ruling, Mr Justice Mitting said that Mitchell’s story did not match 
the CCTV images of the events.

The officer couldn’t have made it up

PC Toby Rowland was “not the sort of man who would have had the wit, 
imagination or inclination to invent on the spur of the moment an account of 
what a senior politician had said to him in temper,” the judge said.

Mitchell lost his temper

The judge said the MP was not in a state of mind that evening either to 
measure his words carefully or to remember precisely what they were.

He said he was satisfied that Mitchell did lose his temper and it was part of 
common experience of life that loss of temper could lead both to loss of 
inhibition in speaking and loss of recollection of what was said.

“It follows that his adamant denial of uttering the words alleged is not of 
itself determinative of the issues.”

Mitchell probably did actually call the officer a “pleb”

Mitting: “For the reasons given I am satisfied at least on the balance of 
probabilities that Mr Mitchell did speak the words alleged or something so 
close to them as to amount to the same including the politically toxic 
word pleb.”

The Sun’s report quoted Mitchell as saying: “Best you learn your fucking place 
– you don’t run this fucking government – you’re fucking plebs.”
