
Ricotta and rosemary bread pudding (V)

A great vegetarian main course, and also good alongside roast chicken. The 
turnips add a nice, peppery touch, but you can leave them out to save work, if 
you prefer. Serves four.

400g loaf white sourdough
800ml full-fat milk
250ml double cream
2 rosemary stalks, plus 1½ tsp chopped rosemary leaves
1 large onion, peeled and quartered
¼ tsp grated nutmeg
8 medium eggs
Salt and white pepper
2 medium turnips, peeled and cut into 1cm slices
200g ricotta
90g parmesan, or vegetarian substitute, grated 
20g chives, finely chopped
Olive oil, to finish

Cut the bread into 2cm-thick slices, spread on a tray and leave overnight to 
dry; alternatively, dry in an 80C oven for half an hour, turning once.

Put the milk, cream, rosemary stalks, onion and nutmeg in a medium saucepan, 
bring to a gentle simmer, remove from the heat and leave to cool. Break the 
eggs into a bowl. Once the milk mix is tepid, strain, discard the onion and 
rosemary, and pour over the eggs, whisking as you go, until you have a smooth 
custard. Whisk in half a teaspoon of salt and a quarter-teaspoon of white 
pepper.

Blanch the turnip for two minutes, strain, refresh and dry. Layer the turnip 
slices over the base of a 22cm x 29cm ovenproof dish.

Mix the ricotta, parmesan, chopped rosemary and chives, and spread over one 
side of each bread slice. Lay the slices cheese-side up in the dish, standing 
them up on an angle and overlapping. Spoon custard over the bread just to 
cover, and gently press down the bread to immerse. Leave to sit for an hour to 
an hour and a half, gently pressing the bread down from time to time and adding 
more custard – you may have some left over, depending on how much your bread 
absorbs.

Half an hour before you are ready to bake, heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 
4. Cover the pudding with foil, bake for 20 minutes, remove the foil and 
continue cooking for 25-35 minutes, until golden-brown and crusty. Poke a knife 
into the centre and gently press down – if no cream surfaces, it's ready. Allow 
to sit for 10 minutes before brushing the top with oil and serving.

Avocado and spiced crouton salad (V)

Adapt this meal in a bowl with the bounty of spring and summer: broad beans, 
artichokes, cucumbers, spinach, peas. Serves four.

2 limes
4 tender celery sticks (taken from the heart) and their leaves
2 spring onions, trimmed and thinly sliced on an angle
12 radishes, quartered lengthways
2 ripe avocadoes
2 tbsp olive oil
Salt and black pepper

For the croutons
120g ciabatta, crust removed
¾ tsp smoked paprika
1 tsp ground cumin
About 100ml sunflower oil

For the croutons, break the bread into 1cm-3cm pieces, place in a bowl, 
drizzle over a teaspoon of water and stir to dampen. Mix the spices with some 
salt and pepper, stir into the bread and shake off any excess spice. Heat the 
oil in a frying pan, and cook the croutons in batches on medium-high heat for 
two to three minutes, until crisp. Transfer to kitchen towel.

Working over a bowl to catch any juice, peel the limes and remove the pith. 
Chop up the flesh, removing any membrane, and add to the bowl. Cut the celery 
on an angle into 0.5cm-thick slices, pick the leaves and add both to the bowl; 
add the spring onions and radishes, too. Halve the avocadoes, remove the stones 
and scoop out the flesh. Chop into 2cm chunks and add to the salad. Add the 
oil, a quarter-teaspoon of salt and lots of black pepper, toss gently, then add 
the croutons. Stir, check the seasoning and serve.

• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi <http://www.ottolenghi.co.uk> 
andNopi <http://www.nopi-restaurant.com/> in London.
