
I've already banged on in a pretend-self-deprecating, 
actually-quite-self-congratulatory way (it would save me so much time if there 
were just one word for all that) about how much I hate going to nurses for 
injections. Nor am I a great troubler of doctors. I've phoned NHS Direct once, 
I've been to the doctor once (until today, I mean) and I've never been into A&E 
(not on T's account, anyway. Before he was born, I was in and out like a 
kerbside brawler).

I have a list of good reasons as long as my arm for all this (not the brawling 
. . . no excuses), but really it is a reaction against my mother, who 
inveterately pestered medics. It wasn't an exaggerated sense of respect for the 
profession - indeed, her favourite anecdotes involve 17 doctors being wrong, 
for ages, until they all, one by one, conceded that she was right. She's not a 
hypochondriac on her own account. I caught her once filing down her own tooth 
with an enormous bit of metal that looked a lot like a microplane. I can't 
account for it - she just used to like taking us to the doctor. You'd get a 
temperature and be in the surgery before you could say, "This is ludicrous, all 
he's going to tell me is that I've got a temperature."

But even a laissez-faire attitude cannot actively ward off illness. Day one, T 
had the following symptoms: a cranky personality, thick luminous snot and he 
was hot. I didn't worry. Day two, he cooled down, but was still cranky. By now 
he had two back teeth so disproportionately large that when he laughed he 
looked like he'd only half-finished an antelope he'd been eating. Well, that's 
teething, I thought, cranky, hot, snotty.

Day three, which is today, everything was fine, but he had a funny cry. He 
sounded honky and wheezy. A bit asthmatic, I would say, if I had any idea what 
asthma sounded like. So, of course, I called my sister, and she said it was 
probably OK. "He's a bit clumsy, as well, though," I added, and she said, 
"Really? Is he making a funny sort of babbling noise, that isn't actual words? 
Does he have very soft skin?"

I tell you why it's hard to spot sarcasm in these situations. It's because 
when you ring your sister to talk about your sick baby, you aren't expecting 
her to instantly take the piss out of you. So anyway, I tried to make him cry 
so she could hear his honking, but she said if he wasn't coughing, it probably 
wasn't a honk. Like, the only reason anybody worried about honking was in case 
it was croup, and croup without a cough would be like measles without spots, 
which is to say, not measles. Flawless logic, but I decided to follow it up 
with an actual doctor.

To recap, I am going to a doctor with a child who has no symptoms at all until 
he starts crying, and even then his only symptom is that he doesn't sound like 
he normally does when he cries.

All a doctor will have to go on is a) nothing at all and b) if he looks at his 
notes, he will at least see that I don't go in very often. But might that count 
against me? He might think I'm so neurotic that I normally take my asymptomatic 
baby straight to casualty, and the only reason I haven't today is because of 
the snow.

Already, the set-up is against me. If I'd given it a bit more thought, I would 
have at least kept T restrained, but I got him straight out of the buggy in the 
hope that taking his coat off would stimulate the honking cry, and instead he 
started to caper, wildly. He found a box of latex gloves and tossed them 
festively about. He leapt on a chair with wheels and roared with joy. He was 
lord of miniature misrule. Nothing could dent his pleasure. The doctor stuck a 
spatula between his teeth to prise his mouth open (surely this would work? 
Surely some wheezy tears?) and got nothing for this violation but a puzzled 
look.

I honestly don't think I've ever seen T so happy in my life. He was like the 
Cow and Gate advert that shows what babies look like when they're really, 
positively, obvious-to-everybody not ill.

Ach. So what if I've got "crazy lady" written on my file now? I got some nasal 
drops out of it, and they were free.
