
How young are children who are expelled from England’s schools? We are hearing 
of worrying cases where pupils may be leaving mainstream education barely after 
entering it. Among these is the case of Adele Beadle’s son. Last week, 
Education Guardian met this mother whose child was permanently excluded from a 
reception class, weeks after turning five.

The boy, whom we are not naming, was expelled from Pickhurst infant academy in 
Bromley, south London, last June, just as he was about to be formally diagnosed 
as autistic. Nine months on, now aged almost six, he is still out of school, 
having spent the second half of last year with no education at all.

The boy was excluded permanently, without having had any fixed-term exclusions 
imposed, says his family, on the day of an incident in which a teaching 
assistant was left with a damaged thumb and after what the school told his 
mother were “numerous behavioural incidents”.

Beadle argues the behavioural problems were generally minor and that the 
school should not have permanently excluded the child without a lengthier 
investigation. He was assessed as on the autistic spectrum by Bromley 
Healthcare on 1 July last year.

The family challenged the school’s decision at an independent tribunal, which 
recommended governors reconsider because the school had not fully followed 
procedures. School governors then did so, but stood by their original decision.

The boy was out of education completely until January, when the council in 
neighbouring Lewisham, where the family lives, placed him in part-time 
out-of-school provision for excluded children.

His mother says: “It’s heartbreaking. I do not know how they can do that to a 
five-year-old who, because of his autism, was only beginning to learn the rules 
of behaviour.”

The school’s headteacher, Leonie Osborne, says: “The school has a number of 
policies and procedures in place which comply with statutory guidance. In order 
to comply with the Data Protection Act we ensure that personal information 
relating to individual pupils … is kept confidential and therefore do not 
comment on their individual circumstances.”

Where have all the academy accounts gone?


Why is it impossible to find published 2014-15 accounts for some academy 
trusts on their websites, given that the government’s academyaccounting rules 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/academies-accounts-direction> say they had to be 
online by the end of January?

We have been trying to access accounts for all the major chains. As of early 
last week it seemed impossible to find last year’s accounts for Bright Tribe, 
the Stockport-based group that wasgiven a share of £5m 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/what-do-we-know-about-the-five-academy-chains-set-for-5m-windfall-to-improve-northern-schools/>
 by ministers last year to sponsor schools in the north. We also searched in 
vain for accounts of the Bedfordshire East Multi-Academy Trust (Bemat). Another 
chain, Christian group Chapel St, was four weeks late with its accounts thanks 
to “complications” over site valuations and “the failure of certain external 
bodies to deliver the information that our auditors required”.

Bright Tribe tells us its accounts were submitted on time to the DfE’s 
Education Funding Agency but that their publication was delayed by an extension 
that was granted because “our auditors are now liaising with the technical team 
at the EFA as we wish to enhance some of the reporting aspects of the accounts”.

Bemat did not respond to requests for comment. The DfE said extensions to the 
January deadline were allowed in “exceptional circumstances”. It offered no 
comment on specific cases.

The issue of accountability for academy trusts continues to be one we will be 
watching.

High-earners league table: new entrant


Meanwhile, another high earner in education’s new league table of well-paid 
academy chief executives has come to our attention. John Tomasevic, of the 
seven-school Nottingham-based Torch Academy Gateway Trust, received 
£270,000-£275,000 in 2014-15, its annual accounts reveal, although the trust 
said the figure included “retrospective payments” from the previous year, and 
that his true salary was £249,604.

That figure would still put him in the top five of our unofficial list of 
top-paid CEOs, ahead of the leaders of all of England’s largest chains except
Sir Daniel Moynihan, of the Harris Federation 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/09/harris-academy-salary-chief-executive-daniel-moynihan-schools>
. The trust says the remuneration reflects Tomasevic’s responsibilities as 
executive head of seven schools and leader of two teacher training programmes.

Costly free school plans lost in the woodlands 


A free school in Bromley, controversially expected to be sited on former 
woodland despite protests, has been put on hold for a year. This is a setback 
for a project that, we can reveal, already seems to have cost the taxpayer an 
eight-figure sum in buying the land.

Related: Mid-year primary school reforms reverse election promise 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/mid-year-primary-school-reforms-academies>

The Beckenham academy, not far from Pickhurst infants in Bromley, south 
London, is now scheduled to open in September 2017, rather than this year. The 
academy trust behind it, Education for the 21st Century, also known as E21C, 
said the DfE had decided that “due to the necessary planning processes the 
construction of the site will be delayed”.

As we reported in January 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/mid-year-primary-school-reforms-academies>
, the 11-acre site was bought for E21C by the Education Funding Agency. Now we 
have learned how much it cost: Land Registry records document the princely sum 
of £16m being paid for the site, in advance of planning permission.

Paul Murphy, E21C’s chief executive, tells us: “The trust … cannot make any 
comment on free school policy. However, it is worth noting that the deferral is 
due to local planning issues, not central government policy.” Perhaps central 
government needs to pay more attention to local planning.



