
The former Irish Times <http://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> editor, 
Conor Brady, has made a contribution to the seemingly unending debate about the 
differences between mainstream and social media.

Given his veteran journalist status and newspaper background, it may be no 
surprise that he finds some social media output to be unacceptable.

In fairness to Brady, I don’t think the headline to his column, in the Irish 
edition of the Sunday Times, “Trust and respect for the media are being bruised 
by the hunger for hits 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/ireland/article1689487.ece>”, 
reflected his central concerns about arguments raised at awomen in media 
conference <http://www.womeninmedia.ie/> and at a Boston College conference 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/social-affairs/religion-and-beliefs/nuala-o-loan-accuses-irish-media-of-virulent-anti-catholic-bias-1.2614136>
.

But he did make make much of an alleged “drift to desensitisation, coarseness 
even, as the boundaries between conventional media and ‘social’ media break 
down”. Note those redundant apostrophes, with more to come. He wrote:

“It was shocking to hear [at the women in media event] speaker after speaker 
describe the offensiveness and abusiveness they encounter on social media and 
the sense of helplessness at being unable to prevent it or respond effectively.

At the same time, it was striking to hear so much emphasis from editors and 
journalists working in social media on the speed of their responsiveness as 
well as the volumes of ‘hits’ and ‘impressions’ they rack up, but with little 
focus on the value or the importance of what is being said.

News is increasingly about the instant and the urgent, and not so much about 
the important or the enduring.

 In this climate it is inevitable there will be poor judgment calls, with 
perhaps unintended hurt and sometimes unfair characterisation of people and 
organisations that come into the news agenda.

And it is not possible to ring-fence these new media in such a way that they 
don’t influence more traditional media. All, from newspapers to radio 
programmes to television stations, are finding themselves caught up in the 
whirlwind that demands instant reaction, allowing virtually no time for 
reflection or application of critical judgment...

The internet and social media cannot be uninvented. However, if journalists 
and programme-makers allow the urgent and the trivial to drive out the 
important, and if they frequently sacrifice judgment to speed, there will be a 
breakdown in trust and respect for the media.”

I would guess that some critics of the mainstream press would counter that its 
questionable ethics - including plenty of “instant reaction”, a failure to 
apply “critical judgment” and the “unfair characterisation of people” - existed 
well before the arrival of the internet.

Misbehaviour by newspapers in particular has a long history and all of the 
sins he visits on social media have featured in countless analyses of 
ink-on-paper editorial output.

So he may be wide of the mark by blaming digital technology for journalistic 
misdemeanours. It is pushing it to suggest that mainstream media is being led 
astray by social media.

That said, he surely has a point about the need for newspapers and TV 
newsrooms to resist the temptation to react too hastily to online postings.

More importantly, it cannot be denied that Brady is right to point the 
“offensiveness and abusiveness” encountered by women. That was a major finding 
ofthe Guardian’s recent series about online harassment. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/the-dark-side-of-guardian-comments>

I may be unduly naive in thinking that it will, eventually, die down. That is 
not to say we should turn a blind eye to the phenomenon. It is vitally 
important to highlight the abuses and, where possible, to expose the abusers. 
Law-breakers must be brought to book.

But we need to put trolling in some kind of historical context, viewing it as 
an initial, if unacceptable, response to the freedom to shout and scream and 
swear while maintaining anonymity.

It is the online equivalent of crying “fire, fire” in a crowded cinema when no 
fire exists. In other words, a misuse of freedom of expression.

I doubt that it will stop entirely but I have a hunch that it will decrease in 
intensity and, most importantly, its effect will be diminished by a greater 
understanding by victims of the cowardice that underlies it.
