
As the V&A prepares to open a blockbuster exhibition on the work of the late 
fashion designer,Alexander McQueen 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexander-mcqueen>, the museum has acquired 
13 photographs taken behind the scenes of his spectacular catwalk shows by the 
French photographer Ann Ray – from an extraordinary archive of more than 35,000 
images she captured and which McQueen described as “my life in pictures”.

The photographer, who has described herself as “an alien” in the fashion 
world, gave nine of the images and the museum bought four more, three of them 
previously unpublished, spanning the period from 1998 when she began working 
with McQueen, to weeks before his suicide in 2010.

 Ray said that beyond feeling honoured herself to join the vast photography 
collection at the V&A, she felt her prints – many with a silvery, shadowy 
quality she obtained by printing them using techniques developed by Victorian 
pioneers of photography – were going to a museum that McQueen had treasured.

“As for the man himself, I knew him well and I loved him well … being gifted 
with his trust, and being keen to do my duty and manage his ‘life in pictures’ 
I cherish the idea that these photographs made with a fierce passion and full 
dedication – art for art indeed – are now at a place that Lee would joyfully 
appreciate … Lee is at home at the V&A. After five years when I missed him 
every day, I can smile.”

Susanna Brown, curator of photography at the V&A, said the photographs were 
full of poetry, lyricism and drama: “It is particularly exciting to be the 
first museum in the world to include her work in our permanent collection.”

The exhibition Alexander McQueen: Savage Beauty 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-alexander-mcqueen-savage-beauty/>
, opens to the public on 14 March. The photographs may be viewed by appointment 
at the V&A’s prints and drawings study room.

• The headline on this article was amended on 2 March 2015. An earlier version 
said the Alexander McQueen photos would be featured in the Savage Beauty 
exhibition. That is not the case.
