
Your singling out of Brasenose College shows the dangers of selectively 
manipulating college data (Prime minister’s Oxford college admits fewest state 
school applicants 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/04/david-cameron-oxford-brasenose-college-admits-fewest-state-school-applicants>
, 4 February). A different set of statistics, used in a recent Social Mobility 
and Child Poverty Commission report, shows Brasenose accepts a high proportion 
of state school applicants. Your selective use of college data obscures the 
fact that across the university, a majority of successful offers go to 
state-educated applicants. More importantly Oxford’s system of reallocating 
pooled candidates means that an applicant’s chance of getting a place at any 
Oxford college is broadly consistent no matter which college they apply to.

You also cite the fact that 7% of school students are from the independent 
schools, ignoring the Sutton Trust’s point that 33% of students getting three A 
grades or better are from this sector. You are missing the point that while 
Oxford is committed to both effective outreach and fair selection, it must work 
against a background of disparities in attainment. You also talk of the 
“much-feared” Oxford interview. We have worked hard in recent years to break 
down the myths and stereotypes surrounding the interview. By reinforcing such 
stereotypes, your article is doing more to deter bright potential applicants 
than any aspect of the application process itself.
Professor Sally Mapstone
Pro-vice-chancellor, Education, Oxford University

• I spend a lot of time visiting schools and running conferences, encouraging 
students to aim as high as they can. In this I am ably supported by the 
schools’ liaison teams from a number of our universities but none more so than 
Oxford University and Brasenose College in particular. Their schools and 
publications officer, Dr Joe Organ, strikes a very ready rapport with all of 
the many student audiences he meets and this is reinforced in the reception 
students then receive at the college’s open days. Apart from being one of 
Oxford’s most beautiful colleges, it is also one of the friendliest and one, 
therefore, that it is easy for students from state schools to feel comfortable 
applying to. That 11% of those who apply from state schools get in compared to 
13.5% from independent schools is not the main point. It is the sheer number 
who apply in the first place. In this respect the college is very successful in 
generating the sort of self-belief and self-confidence that many of our young 
people need even to think that they stand a chance of entry. Some undoubtedly 
apply more in hope than anticipation (a more likely source for the statistics) 
but they are being encouraged to aspire and for that the college, in my view, 
deserves all due credit.
Peter Rawling
Bracknell, Berkshire

• Your article concerning the poor record of Oxford colleges in offering 
places to state school applicants brought back memories of my own application 
to Oxford in 1966. My state school had put me forward for an interview-only 
entrance without any preparation on their part. I was rejected for a place. 
Subsequently I achieved three As at A-level, top first class honours at York, a 
PhD at Newcastle, a DSc from York and a professorship from Nottingham. Nothing 
changes.
Prof Derek Middlemiss
Newark, Nottinghamshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
