
Coverage of the housing crisis can be London-centric for two reasons: the 
media is increasingly based in London (the death of local papers exacerbates 
this) and the extreme figures, in terms of both homelessness and house prices, 
make for headline-grabbing figures.

But the housing crisis is complex, and takes many forms – there are as many 
reasons for homelessness as there are homeless people, and building more houses 
won’t solve the housing crisis in areas that already have a surplus of housing. 
In Liverpool, south Wales and much of the industrial north, whole streets of 
homes are vacant, but people still struggle to afford to even rent, as a recent 
study by Shelter shows.

Shelter’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/15/renters-eviction-report-shelter-housing>
 found 350,000 renters were at risk of eviction. News stories lead with the 
headline figures concerning Londoners, but the figures across the country are 
equally worrying. In the north west, 1 in 34 renting households in Halton are 
at risk, 1 in 38 in Bolton, and 1 in 43 in Tameside. In Peterborough, 1 in 35 
renting households face eviction, and in Birmingham the figure is 1 in 47, a 
total of 3,960 households. Walking down your average street, the equivalent of 
one household on each side of the road is potentially at risk of being kicked 
out of their home.

As Shelter points out, rates of “possession” vary across the country: in 
certain areas, a higher proportion own their home rather than rent, so looking 
at the proportion of renters at risk of eviction makes more sense than looking 
at the proportion of the population in the same position. Far more people rent 
than own in London compared to the rest of the UK, so the overall rate of 
eviction in renting is much higher because the proportion of renters is higher.

But the figures also expose one of the fallacies of the housing crisis: the 
relentless focus on London perpetuates the idea that this is a problem solely 
anchored in the south east. Claiming that is so lets you argue it’s simply a 
case of supply and demand: there is higher demand for property and rental 
accommodation in London, so prices are naturally higher. That’s how markets 
work – it’s simple.

Except it isn’t that simple: across Britain, people are facing a crisis in 
housing and in basic pay. Headlines about the collapse of BHS and the horrific 
conditions at Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct have understandably shocked people, 
but these aren’t mere consequences of one or two rogue businessmen, but the 
symptoms of rapacious capitalism. The women in the Sports Direct warehouses who 
went into labour at work did so because work has become precarious, and 
zero-hours contracts have been allowed to bloom, because of government attacks 
on workers’ rights both under Labour and, to an increased degree, under the 
Tories.

If you’re on a zero-hours contract, you’re forced to scrabble for any work 
possible to pay your rent, accepting conditions most salaried people would walk 
out over. If you want to take your employer to court for sexual harassment, 
racial discrimination, or for forcing you out when you announced your 
pregnancy, you now have to pay to do so. The poorest have been denied justice, 
as well as decent pay and conditions.

Cuts to benefits, the cataclysmic farce of the universal credit rollout, and 
the assault on support for disabled people mean that, post-recession, people 
who struggle to earn a decent wage are denied basic support. The housing crisis 
is an affordability crisis, but not one that solely lies in the cost of London 
flats: people across the country simply can’t afford to live. Rents in the 
north west are lower, but pay is lower still. Geographic inequalities have 
worsened post-recession, and many areas feel as though they’ve been left behind.

The housing crisis is everywhere, because pay, benefits and working conditions 
have worsened or been cut. Attacks on unionisation and government defences of 
zero-hours contracts will do nothing but fuel an already blazing fire. This is 
a nationwide crisis, because it’s a crisis of capitalism: as long as we 
subsidise companies for paying poverty wages, whilst blaming low earners for 
their own poverty, nothing will change.

Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.

