
Britain’s next judge at the European court of human rights 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/european-court-of-human-rights> in Strasbourg 
will be Tim Eicke QC, a London barrister and fluent German speaker who has 
frequently appeared in international courts.

He was elected to the £155,000-a-year post by a clear majority of 
parliamentary representatives at theCouncil of Europe 
<http://www.theguardian.com/law/council-of-europe> after being recommended as 
the best qualified legal candidate.

Eicke, who studied English law at Dundee University and German law at Passau 
University, is a barrister at Essex court chambers. He was appointed a QC in 
2011. He has regularly appeared at the supreme court and has been instructed by 
both claimants and the government. He represented the home secretary last year 
at the supreme court in a key case on the legal definition of statelessness.

Candidates competing for the post were initially reduced to a long list chosen 
by a committee set up by the judicial appointments commission. The list was 
then whittled down to three candidates by the justice secretary, Michael Gove.

The three – Eicke, Jessica Simor QC and Murray Hunt – were interviewed by 
members of the parliamentary assembly in Strasbourg and elected by Council of 
Europe representatives. Eicke secured 94 votes, Simor 47 and Hunt 17.

Despite speculation that the appointment would become entangled in partisan 
bill of rights or Eurosceptic politics in the runup to the referendum, all 
three candidates are widely respected within the legal profession. None are 
known to have any party affiliation.

The vacancy was created by the forthcoming retirement of the judge currently 
representing Britain, Paul Mahoney, who will turn 70 in September, the 
compulsory age for retiring from the court. A former European court of human 
rights (ECHR) registrar, he was appointed in 2012.

Candidates for the ECHR bench, on which each of the 47 member states have a 
judge, must “be of high moral character and either possess the qualifications 
required for appointment to high judicial office or be jurisconsults of 
recognised competence”. Their salary is traditionally paid tax free.

If the home secretary, Theresa May 
<http://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>, has her way, Eicke may have a 
remarkably short tenure. Last month, May called for the UK to remain in the EU 
but pull out of the European convention on human rights and the Strasbourg 
court.

Britain’s record at the ECHR is good, with judges finding relatively few human 
rights violations. Last year there were only four cases in which violations 
were recorded. Nine other judgments found no violations and 533 applications 
were declared inadmissible or struck out.

Simor, a fluent French speaker, is a barrister at Matrix chambers. She became 
a QC in 2013 and has also appeared for the government and claimants. She 
represented the Open Rights Group and Privacy International at the European 
court of justice in Luxembourg this month in a surveillance case against the UK 
government.

Hunt, the legal adviser to parliament’s joint committee on human rights, is 
also a distinguished human rights expert. He, like Simor, was a founder of 
Matrix chambers, when he worked as a barrister, and is a visiting professor at 
Oxford University’s law faculty.
