
America’s greatest newspaper has paused at the yellow brick crossroads – and 
gambled hugely.Here comes a unit called “New York Times Global” 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/14/new-york-times-to-invest-50m-on-global-digital-expansion>
, supposed new driver of international growth, carrying a $50m pot to stake and 
spend.

“Because our digital report is still designed and produced mainly for a US 
audience, we have not come close to realising our potential to attract readers 
outside our home market,” say chairman, chief executive and editor together. 
“Just as theTimes became a truly national news organisation in a previous 
generation, we believe we now have the opportunity to become an indispensable 
leader in global news and opinion.”

That’s a potentially profound step. “While we are already seeing significant 
growth in consumer revenue from international markets, we believe we can 
achieve much more by better engaging our non-US readers and reporting for them 
as well as about them.”

In short, as domestic print sales and ads go on sliding, as digital ad 
expansion creaks under the strain, Planet Earth is the chosen source of 
salvation – primed to deliver more than double digital revenue growth over the 
next four years. “Every part of the company… needs to think creatively about 
attracting and retaining a bigger non-American audience.”

And here’s the essence of this crucial gamble. The New York Times reckons it 
won’t survive by trying to be America’s finest. Henceforth, international means 
just that. The paper will drop in Peruvian news for Lima and Indian news for 
Mumbai. It will address everyone everywhere. It will be the voice of a wider 
world. Which isn’t necessarily why you – or many of its 1.1 million digital 
subscribers – buy or read theTimes in the first place.

On the contrary, I follow the NYT for its American coverage, American 
viewpoints, American culture, American politics. I read it because the columns 
it carries – Krugman, Dowd et al – are also being read by hundreds of thousands 
across the States, because the same editorials to peruse over breakfast are 
clippings beside Barack Obama’s coffee pot. This, in size and newsroom 
strength, is a superpower news organisation. It draws you into that ambit. It’s 
an authentic snapshot.

But diffused, in some page-view quest, across the globe, accreting staffing 
costs whilst stuffing its sites with news that America will never see or need 
to read? That’s an entirely different concept. Take New York out of theNew York 
Times and it becomes somehow androgynous – and vulnerable to the battle that 
consumes its US editors day by day as theWashington Post, fuelled by Bezos 
money, dices month by month for home-ground digital supremacy.

Is there such a thing as a true international digital news force? Even 
Facebook, stalled at the Chinese and Japanese borders, can’t manage that. 
Business and, maybe, celebrity gossip can find a niche round the world. But 
general news is a much harder call where audience, product and a narrower focus 
have to come together to spell success. TheNew York Times has its special 
selling point worldwide: the best of America. It’s a tall order to risk all 
that – especially if Bezos isn’t watching your back.

■ So much bad news “is bad for us”, glooms Simon Jenkins in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/21/bad-news-media-misery>. 
But cheer up: skip over to the lighter side. TryLittleThings 
<http://www.littlethings.com/>, a viral site hitting 50 million unique visitors 
a month (mostly via Facebook) – and relentlessly, ineffably, incredibly cheery. 
“Earth Day Cupcakes Are The Perfect Way To Celebrate Mother Nature”, it 
chirrups. See how your “Rusty Fire Pit can be Transformed Into A Shabby-Chic 
Coffee Table!”. And a “Giant Bunny Named Bluebell Is Happy As Can Be In Her 
Forever Home <http://www.littlethings.com/giant-bunny-bluebell/>”.

There now… You can feel Sir Simon warming up already (unless it’s the coffee 
table on fire).
