
The proportion of female professors in UK universities is too low. The same 
can be said of women in any full-time, permanent academic position within 
higher education. This may come as a surprise to many, given that we are 
talking about a profession rhetorically committed to equality, fairness and 
opportunity for all. Don’t believe the hype.

There is a fundamental mismatch between the declared aims of universities as 
employers and the HR practices that they implement. The official message is 
that the figures need to change, that the balance needs to be redressed, and 
that the culture needs to shift. In practice, that message is distorted by 
recruitment, retention and promotion procedures that entrench the status quo.

Much of the sector has yet to address the crucial issue of quantity versus 
quality when it comes to research. At present, those who take parental leave 
(almost always women) aredisadvantaged 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0000127> by a 
system that places value on the number of publications on a CV. As long as 
quantity remains the touchstone of achievement in so many institutions, there 
will never be equality of opportunity.

That is not to suggest that women should get an easier ride; just a fair shot 
at the (professorial) title. Being a parent of young children does not make 
your research any worse, but it does mean there will be less of it. Until last 
year, all but a few weeks of parental leave could be granted to mothers but not 
to fathers, meaning that women, to date, have spent more time on childcare and 
less on research than their male counterparts. The professional criteria 
against which both are judged remain identical.

Adjusting appointment and promotion criteria to account for the fact that 
fewer outputs of the requisite quality can be produced in a shorter period of 
time is not to lower standards. Imagine a sporting contest in which one team is 
allowed 35 overs and the other team is allowed 50 overs, but in which the 
object remains to score the most runs. This would rightly be regarded as just 
not cricket.

One of the major achievements of the 20th century was to give women choices. 
One of the major challenges of the 21st century will be to indemnify them 
against the costs of those choices. While men disproportionately occupy 
positions of power and decision-making, however, it is difficult to see how 
this will happen. If the ability to have it all is your birthright, this issue 
is unlikely to shine brightly on your radar.

This is a cultural problem and one which extends far beyond the ivory tower. 
An aggravating factor within academia, however, is the term “parental leave”.
Academics <http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/academics> crave 
“leave” as space to think and to write, unfettered by running departments, 
advising on policy, poring over accounts, organising conferences, applying for 
funding, marking, writing lectures, supervising theses and so on. It is 
something to be savoured when you have it, and envied when others do.

There is a sense amongst some, though, that parental leave amounts to much the 
same thing: a restful, productive and enjoyable period of time away from 
teaching and administration.

In fact, parental leave is, in this sense, anti-leave. From a physical 
perspective, it is not at all restful, from a professional perspective, it is 
not at all productive (no, it is not possible to fit in worthwhile research 
during nap times). As for enjoyable, that depends on the individual; some love 
it, some hate it. If the latter, this is usually because they miss work or 
fear, with good reason, that they are being left behind by their peers in the 
office.

Whichever it is, there is little real choice in the matter; biology and legal 
constraints dictate that women must step back from the day job to nurture 
miniature human beings, who are as potent and promising as they are dependent 
and defenceless.

There is, perhaps, light at the end of this centuries-long tunnel: shared 
parental leave, introduced in April 2015 allows both parents to share 50 weeks 
of leave and 37 weeks of pay between them in the first year of their child’s 
life. If this means that the impact of career breaks starts to be felt by men, 
it will probably be taken very seriously indeed.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<http://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com

