
What do these trainers say about me?

“I know what I like and what suits me. I’ve gone out in a 50s-style prom dress 
with coordinating trainers before…”

And what her trainers really say about her

Emily has a fine collection of DC skate shoes 
<http://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2011/dec/05/rise-fall-skateboard-chic>
, but she’s definitely not a trainer-head. She’s not exclusive about them, for 
a start – there are some Nikes in there. She hasn’t got the boxes. She hasn’t 
kept them all pristine. She’s not looking for the most obscure pair, the 
limited edition, the old-school original that nobody else has got. She just 
likes DC shoes.

DC, as a brand, is fairly well respected among skaters: it’s been involved in 
skating for a long time, and it makes decent shoes. It’s sneered at a little 
for being the type of shoe that non-skaters use – non-skaters like Emily – but 
it’s up there with Vans and Fallen as a “proper” skate shoe. If Emily was a 
trainer-head, this brand history would be important, but she’s not.

Trainers – sports shoes – are the most revealing of footwear. Old-school 
Adidas? You’re northern and interested in music and football. Unless you’re 
wearing Stan Smiths bought in the past year, in which case you’re a fashion 
bunny. Or Superstars, which mean you like hip-hop (if they’re in bright 
colours, then, specifically, Pharrell). Nike is more of a southern UK brand. 
Nike Air Max are the shoes most preferred by burglars, though Reebok Classics 
are up there, too… I could go on.

What Emily’s collection of DCs show is that she has more personality than her 
trainers. She doesn’t buy DCs for what the brand says about her. She’s 
confident enough to make DC mean what she wants it to mean. Her style overrides 
the message that the brand wants to put across (one of authenticity; it’s 
always about authenticity with sports marques). She buys DCs because they’re 
comfortable, they’re bright and they suit her multicoloured, sexy, individual 
style. Emily’s strong sense of self and style means all brands must submit.


If you would like Miranda to cast an eye over your favourite possession, email 
a photograph tomagazine@observer.co.uk <mailto:magazine@observer.co.uk>
