
Fitness has come a long way since aerobics and legwarmers: it’s no longer just 
about getting sweaty or honing your body. Scientists have found an indisputable 
link between physical fitness and brain power. Could we harness this to give us 
the edge at work?

There are plenty of examples of high-profile women who train hard. In May last 
year, America’s first lady, Michelle Obama, shared herworkout regime 
<http://time.com/3890731/michelle-obama-workout/>, which includes weights, 
skipping and boxing. Editor-in-chief Anna Wintour sets herself up for a busy 
day at Vogue with a game of tennis every morning at 5.45am. Alison 
Trauttmansdorff-Weinsberg, HR director for a leading UK investment bank, 
represented team GB at triathlon last year and claims that sporting prowess 
brings her respect from the men she works with.

I have been a pilates and exercise instructor for over 12 years and spent much 
of this time in corporate environments. I’ve observed that it is often women 
who aspire to seniority or who are in influential positions at work who invest 
the most in their physical health.

The latest exercise science links strength and power with both improved 
cognitive function and bigger brains.

These women aren’t content with just getting fit. They want to optimise their 
training based on the latest science and research, just as they would with 
their job-specific training. They see fitness as an indispensable rung on their 
career ladder.

We’ve known about endorphins and the feelgood factor associated with exercise 
for a while but the latest exercise science links strength and power with both 
improved cognitive function and bigger brains.A twins study published in the 
journal Gerontology in November last year 
<https://www.karger.com/Article/FullText/441029> showed chemicals released in 
the body through exercise could boost not only our processing power but also 
the mass of our grey matter.

This link between exercise and improved brain power is not new. Aerobic 
conditioning is a recommended for stroke rehabilitation and a2013 Cochrane 
report 
<http://www.cochrane.org/CD006489/DEMENTIA_exercise-programs-for-people-with-dementia>
 showed exercise boosted the cognitive skills of Alzheimer’s patients. The 
November twins study however is the first to stipulate leg power as a 
determinant factor in improved cognitive processing.

The brain size findings are new too, especially when it comes to the benefits 
of exercise in your 50s and 60s. We know that regular exercise can halt 
sarcopenia (muscle ageing). Evidence now suggests that the same is true for our 
brains.

Exercise can also give you more energy – and this isn’t just psychological. 
With a periodised training programme (one that gets increasingly more 
challenging), the body adapts to an increased workload. One of these 
adaptations is in your mitochondria, your battery or energy cells. Mitochondria 
then become denser and more efficient, giving you more energy for exercise and 
for life. This could be the reason why women who exercise regularly appear to 
have boundless energy.

The link between exercise and our brains is an evolving area for scientific 
research but the physiological benefits of exercise are indisputable.

Here are five things you could do this year to make a difference to your 
physical and cognitive health:

Learn how to squat

Squatting is the most fundamental exercise in your leg strength and overall 
body strength arsenal.

Cut your strength and conditioning programme down to size

Getting fitter and stronger doesn’t have to mean spending hours in a gym. A 
basic programme optimised to your needs, for 20 minutes, three times a week, is 
enough to see significant gains.

Optimise your programme to your DNA

Evolving DNA science means you can now find out what types of exercise your 
body will adapt quickly to from a saliva swab.

Small steps lead to big gains

If the thought of exercise makes you panic, start with a 20-minute walk, three 
times a week.

Build physical activity into your day

If time is a limitation, get exercise instructors into your office 
<http://fit-school.co.uk/>. It’s great for staff morale, productivity and can 
also provide networking opportunities. In Japan’s offices, everyone stops at 
6.30am to take part in “rajio taisou”. It is encouraged by Japanese employers 
since it’s believed that exercise boosts mental and physical agility and so 
improves productivity. Exercise classes like pilates and yoga can also help to 
reduce sick days, by helping staff manage stress and back pain.

Karen Laing <http://alittlefitter.com/> leads the holistic and women’s health 
arm of Fit School, as well as teaching pilates around Essex and London.
