
Since the birth of rock festivals in the 1960s, the UK festival market has 
become one of the most diverse and lucrative in the world. Its growth 
accelerated in the late 1980s and early 1990s with the emergence of the rave 
scene – and since 2000 that growth has rocketed, partially as a result of 
smaller boutique events.

Consumer spending has increased in line with that growth. Live music events in 
the UK attract9.5 million people 
<http://www.ukmusic.org/research/music-tourism-wish-you-were-here-2015/> and 
generate £3.1bn every year, in direct and indirect
spend on tickets, transport, accommodation and food and drink. 

Recently the UK Festival Awards Market Report 
<http://www.festivalinsights.com/2013/12/uk-festival-market-report-2013/> asked 
the public: What’s your opinion of brand sponsorship at festivals? 15% said it 
made the overall experience more enjoyable, however 57% said they accept 
festivals need brand sponsorship, but that it doesn’t improve their enjoyment.

This presents a clear opportunity to transform the festival and brand 
experience. Striking the right balance between your brand values and those of 
the event can be tricky.

How do we do it? Mainly by moving away from filling activations with explicit 
marketing messages and instead creating environments that allow consumers to 
shape their interaction with the brand.

Brands seeing the greatest return from festivals are those who become true 
partners, working with promoters to curate a line-up or produce their own 
original entertainment content to draw in the crowds.

We’ve identified three key areas of focus for guaranteeing your festival spend 
is working as hard as it can.

Brand amplification through multiple channels

Activation and amplification should fit seamlessly with the festival 
experience. To do this you must identify your brand’s passionate purpose, 
engage with the festival creative team and their channels – and then get loud.

Building festival activation into your wider strategy

Instead of just delivering a great piece of on-the-day experiential marketing 
(which will likely look expensive) brand owners can leverage the partnership 
across all channels, as part of a broader strategic plan. There’s an 
opportunity to work with promoters to extend your association - whether it’s 
producing content before, on and after the event, or using the tickets, which 
form part of most sponsorship deals as competition prizes.

Data capture

Your audience will interact with your brand at numerous times during a 
festival and technology is making it easier to measure and analyse this data 
via cashless payments, near field communication (NFC) and radio-frequency 
identification (RFID)-enabled wristbands and beacons.

When it comes to retailing, data can be enriched by the “cruise ship” effect, 
where attendees are limited in their purchasing options. Using short and simple 
questionnaires, cross-referenced with attendee data, can supply unique insights 
into who your consumers are, which of your competitors they’re buying and which 
of your products they’re drawn to.

With these goals in mind, we’ve identified a further three key points for 
anyone looking to work with a festival property in 2016.

 * Mobile connectivity: until current petitions to install taller mobile phone 
towers are accepted, it’s down to telecoms sponsors to bring widespread 
coverage to larger festivals. It’s something to keep in mind when planning 
activations, particularly at smaller events.

 * Festival identities: the identity of each event is sacred and not something 
readily compromised to accommodate brand partners. Brands therefore need to do 
their research before pitching ideas to festival teams, avoiding the need for 
major changes and multiple rounds of amends. 
 * Arena ownership: focus less on naming rights and more on co-creation. Last 
year saw brands bring everything from live DJ performances to paint fights and 
jelly wrestling. By creating something multi-sensory and with a “festival feel” 
they became a main attraction, with revellers returning numerous times and 
producing thousands of pieces of social content. 
This advertisement feature is brought to you by the Marketing Agencies 
Association <http://www.marketingagencies.org.uk/maa>, sponsors of the Guardian 
Media Network’sAgencies hub 
<http://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/agencies>.
