
Most people do not think of darkness as a luxury. But if you live in a council 
flat with a bulkhead light shining into your window all night long, you might. 
Light, especially in the urban realm, is a powerful thing. People make spaces 
through light, it is the stuff of our everyday lives … so perhaps it is not 
surprising that it reinforces the growing social inequality in our towns and 
cities.

London’s social housing estates are immediately recognisable by their bright, 
cold light from tall masts – lighting calibrated for maximum visibility to 
allow for better CCTV surveillance and the prevention of anti-social behaviour 
and crime. This kind of lighting marks out these spaces as problems to be dealt 
with functionally and configures them as less valued spaces for less valued 
people.

This come at the expense of massive light pollution and cost in energy and 
maintenance, and has a negative impact on the wellbeing of the people whose 
bedrooms are illuminated by “prison yard lighting”.

In contrast, darkness, created by carefully curated lighting, is an explicit 
feature of more affluent neighbourhoods and high-priced developments. Here, 
light is consciously used as a design tool to create an aesthetically 
pleasurable nightscape that appears valuable, safer and more inviting.

Related: Turning off street lights does not lead to more crime or accidents – 
study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/29/turning-off-street-lights-does-not-lead-to-more-or-accidents-study>

Not all urban spaces need highly aestheticised lighting schemes, but everyone 
deserves to live in socially successful and engaging places. This can be lost 
in how we make and value different kinds of spaces through lighting – public 
lighting is a barometer of inequality in urban areas.

This is not only hugely problematic, but unnecessary. New light technologies 
promise more energy efficient solutions and smart systems that can make 
lighting more responsive and adaptable to the social space it illuminates. We 
have the technological tools to make spaces such as social housing more 
equitable through better lighting.

However, the way in which these light technologies are currently used in 
social housing paints a different picture. New technologies, such as brighter 
bulbs that use less energy, are used alongside old paradigms of control and 
surveillance. This does not improve spaces, but simply makes them brighter and 
reinforces light inequalities.

We need a better and more detailed understanding of how lighting can work for 
people, regardless of where they live, starting with whether or not it shines 
into their bedrooms.

Lighting can help build social inclusion and civic life across urban spaces 
and create places that are engaging, accessible and comfortable for everyone 
who shares them. Equitable lighting needs to be based on knowledge of the 
diverse uses of a space and how to respond to it creatively. This requires more 
intelligent conversations that bring together different stakeholders – and then 
we can talk about darkness for everyone.

Mona Sloane is co-founder of the Configuring light 
<http://www.configuringlight.org/> research programme at the London School of 
Economics and Political Science


Join the Guardian Housing Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/housing/register/> to read more pieces like 
this. Follow us on Twitter (@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/GuardianHousingNetwork/?ref=hl> to keep up with the 
latest social housing news and views.
