
Under bright spotlights in the drama room, students are getting into character 
as magical beings. The cast members of A Midsummer Night’s Dream grin and 
grimace as they skip, climb, leap and crawl through the plastic chairs that 
double as their enchanted forest.

This is a rehearsal at King Ethelbert school, in Thanet, east Kent 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/21/children-secondary-school-pupils-five-years-teenagers-annual-gcse-kent>
, for a performance that will be the culmination of two years’ work during 
which the school has transformed from one of the worst in the country to one of 
the best of its type. And, says the headteacher, it’s thanks to Shakespeare.
 Kate Greig, head of King Ethelbert school 
An audience of more than 200 will walk through Margate this evening to see the 
performance. Roads in the town will be closed off as children from several 
local schools perform in the production, which will move between the Turner 
Contemporary art gallery, Margate seafront and Dreamland, the town’s vintage 
theme park, where the twisting metal of the fairground rides will stand for a 
forest.

“Seven years ago, it would have been hard to imagine this,” says Kate Greig, 
King Ethelbert’s headteacher, who joined the school in 2009 when only 14% of 
students achieved five good GCSE passes. “Aspirations were extremely low and 
there was a real reluctance from parents to engage with the school.”

Last summer, 55% of the students attained five GCSEs, including English and 
maths 
<http://dashboard.ofsted.gov.uk/dash.php?urn=136584%0D%0Dhttps://www.rsc.org.uk/education/how-your-school-can-work-with-us/partnerships>
, with a grade between A* and C. This year, Greig hopes that could become 65%. 
But she says the difference is not only in the results: there has also been a 
cultural change.

The school, which is in a deprived part of Kent, teamed up with the Royal 
Shakespeare Company <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc> to implement an 
approach that gets students and teachers to think like actors and directors in 
the rehearsal room using simple techniques including moving and speaking the 
play aloud. Greig says it has transformed teaching in all departments, raised 
aspirations and increased parental involvement.

Related: Five children, five years at secondary school, and the best job I 
ever had 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/21/children-secondary-school-pupils-five-years-teenagers-annual-gcse-kent>

“One of the things about coastal towns is there can be a real them-and-us 
mentality,” she says. “People feel left out of what’s going on elsewhere in the 
country. Parents would say to me, ‘why would I vote?’ They felt voting was 
something that other people did. They felt like that about Shakespeare too – 
that it wasn’t for people like them. But Shakespeare is for everybody and now I 
think they feel that too.”

Greig is going to Downing Street this month to talk to officials about using 
the arts to transform a school.

King Ethelbert is a smaller than average secondary school in 
Birchington-on-Sea, a non-selective school in a county that retains the grammar 
school system. Moving across its litter-free playground between its red-brick 
buildings, or speaking to its smartly dressed, confident and articulate pupils, 
it has the air of a successful school.

“Don’t be fooled,” says Greig. “Visitors often think it’s a fairly 
middle-class, middle-ability school. It is neither of those things.

“We are a non-selective school so everybody here has failed the 11 plus. Only 
16% of our parents have been to university or have had a member of the family 
go to university. A fair proportion of our children have never been to 
Canterbury [the cathedral city 13 miles away], never mind to the theatre.”

Greig says that, when the school applied to join the RSC programme three years 
ago, parents were not impressed. Some said “the RSC are posh people, they 
aren’t going to come to Margate”. Others said: “Shakespeare is not for people 
like us.”

The RSC’s learning and performance network 
<https://www.rsc.org.uk/education/how-your-school-can-work-with-us/partnerships>
 was set up in 2006 in an attempt to overturn negative attitudes towards 
studying Shakespeare. At the time, all 14-year-olds had to sit a compulsory 
Shakespeare Sats paper and, although this was abolished in 2008, the RSC was 
concerned that many students and teachers had been scarred by the experience.

Related: It's Shakespeare Week: are children well-school’d in the Bard? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/mar/17/shakespeare-week-children-school-henry-the-fifth>

Over the past 10 years, the scheme has worked with 505 schools, reaching an 
estimated 690,000 students. Getting students and teachers from behind their 
desks and on to their feet is key.

Jacqui O’Hanlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2008/nov/27/rsc-shakespeare-schools>
, the RSC’s head of education, says: “We all know that Shakespeare is 
difficult, so we cannot pretend it isn’t. We cannot pretend we can treat 
Shakespeare like a book that you can pick up and read. It should not be 
surprising that this complex language that was written for performance can only 
be fully understood through performance.”

Understanding the language of Shakespeare can be a daunting prospect for 
anyone, says Robin Belfield, an actor and director who runs training for 
teachers as part of the RSC programme.

“We get teachers to physically explore the words,” he explains. “At first, 
teachers can be quite apprehensive. They do not feel comfortable about getting 
up from behind their desks and getting young people to challenge their ideas. 
It is not an overnight process.”

At King Ethelbert, teachers and pupils have embraced the approach. English 
lessons often start with moving desks to create a performance space. Students 
work in small groups, discussing particular speeches, before performing in the 
centre of the room and receiving feedback from classmates.

Jade Styles, 14, who is playing Hermia in tonight’s production, says the 
approach has helped to bring her out of her shell: “It’s changed from sitting 
down to being more active and playing those parts instead of just reading it 
out because, if you just read it, you’re not really taking it on board whereas, 
if you get up and act it out, you are actually learning something.”

The school has seen an improvement across all subjects, not only English, 
since starting the project. During a recent Shakespeare-themed week, maths 
lessons covered iambic pentameter while science lessons involved detailed 
investigations of deaths in the plays.

Related: Top 10 Shakespeare books for children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/apr/22/top-10-andrew-matthews-shakespeare-books>

History teacher Jordan Underwood says students have arrived at his lessons 
keen to study the history of the plays they have performed. “As a historian, 
you can’t take things at face value. Shakespeare was a great wordsmith but he 
was also a great spin doctor. We like to challenge a lot of what they have 
learned from Shakespeare.”

Josh Deery, the school’s head of maths, says every subject benefits from the 
pupils’ newfound enthusiasm for performance. “As a teacher, you can harness 
that passion and direct it into your subject,” he says.

A national evaluation by Warwick University’s Centre for Educational 
Development, Appraisal and Research concluded that the scheme substantially 
improved students’ approach to Shakespeare and improved their attitude to 
school. It judged the scheme “groundbreaking” and called for a shakeup of 
teaching with less emphasis on instruction by teachers and more on rehearsal 
and performance by pupils.

As Greig says: “I knew that if we worked with the RSC, then our teaching of 
Shakespeare would be better. What I hadn’t fully appreciated was the extent of 
the transformation of the rest of the school. Teachers have said it has 
revolutionised their view of what children can do.”
