
On the menu of life, my friends, you can order well or you can order badly. 
Sometimes you get the prime fillet steak, sometimes you are chopped liver. You 
may have your fingers crossed for les entrées, but what you actually get is Les 
Dennis. Which makes you really les misérables.

So please. Remember that ordering is important. Don't ever think you can just 
wander into a restaurant, point at something you vaguely recognise on a 
pre-printed list of edibles, cross your fingers and call it dinner. That is 
just asking for trouble, you naïve ninny. That is just asking for something 
that's been curdling in the back of the chef's fridge for three weeks. Only now 
to be recycled as Patsy of Sitting Duck's Butt (from Dumb Cluck Farm) with 
Pinhead Oatmeal & Clot's Cream.

Smart diners understand they have a responsibility to themselves to order 
well. To think about what they are eating. To ask advice where necessary. And 
to make darned sure they get a better dinner than that schmuck they married, 
sitting opposite.

So. Rule number one. Make like a pair of automatic binoculars; stay focused. 
Concentrate on what the menu is trying to tell you. Generally, the longer the 
menu is, the poorer the food will be, unless you happen to be in a Chinese or 
Lebanese restaurant or somesuch. Lucky you! Elsewhere, beware of 
over-elaboration, of any flowery abuse of language lurking in the herb-strewn 
hedgerow. A cascade of butter-glazed vegetables; John Dory complemented with 
langoustine foam; scallops resting alongside crisp pork belly; sea bass laid on 
a bed of red onion and duck confit climaxed with a sherry vinegar sauce. On top 
of anything else, it's bloody annoying to meet a potato that's enjoying a 
better sex life than you might be.

Watch out for too many competing flavours and a certain kind of fretfulness in 
the main courses; anything over-garnished is always indicative of a nervous 
kitchen overreaching itself. The frivolous use of a foreign language when not 
strictly necessary should also ring alarm bells (Chaud Pot de Lancashire, los 
empañadas à la Cornish) and always watch out for false sourcing claims. A 
Scottish restaurant in central London sells a dish called Highland Chicken. 
What is that? Jaywalking blindfold across the A9 north of Perth?

Which brings us to 'cheese omlet with three range egg's' and all variants 
thereof. Oh dear. Not good. Spelling or grammar mistakes show a lack of 
attention to detail that is not fatal, but not particularly palatable if 
applied to your lunch special. The difference between cap mushrooms and crap 
mushrooms is small, but significant.

Then there's all your ethicals. Caviar, non-sustainable fish species, foie 
gras, shark's fin, tomatoes that did not lead a happy life and all the rest? 
Here, I feel, you must follow your own conscience, not someone else's.

Extreme eating? Big, but not clever. Those gargantuan feasts designed to test 
the digestive scaffolding of the consumer on table eight are always 
regrettable. Steer clear of any multi-pound mega-burgers with pounds of melted 
cheese, lettuce, tomato, a 'mound' of French fries, relishes, ketchup and 
pickle wedges. It is usually delivered on a giant tray by two waiters, shortly 
before you are delivered to casualty on a stretcher. Stacked and Stuffed 
Hotcakes? Isn't she a porn star?

Avoid the following at all costs. Non-dairy ice cream. The Sharing Platter. 
Anything described as a 'Seafood Symphony' or 'A Poem In Pork'. The Chef's 
Special Egg Roast. Chicken Maryland. Songbirds, obviously. In this day and age, 
four and 20 blackbirds baked in a pie is a no-no. Especially if they are 
non-organic. Surf'n'turf? You've got to ask yourself why the only other 
creature to relish a seafood and meat combo is Jaws. Fillet of turbot on the 
bone. (It's either on the bone or it's a fillet, it can't be both. Applies to 
everything.) Quail Leg Salad. Polk Salad Annie. Annie Get Your Buns. Any dish 
that comes equipped with its own 'joke'. Anything described as the 
Connoisseur's Choice; it always arouses suspicion that a connoisseur would eat 
it if the only other option was his or her own intestines baked in Béchamel. 
Anything grey, except oysters. Anything served in a potato basket. Anything 
served in a tuile basket, especially parsley sorbet. Anything that bills itself 
as an 'innovative interpretation' of anything. Mackerel with peppered 
strawberries and elderflower syrup. Black pudding spring rolls.

Finally, if the staff keep asking if everything is OK, then raising their 
eyebrows when you say yes, you are in trouble. If nothing on the menu is worth 
ordering, follow the example of Moe, the bartender in The Simpsons. In French 
restaurants, he always orders 'the best thing you got, stuffed with the second 
best thing you got'.

Remember; be a glutton, but not for punishment.

Three restaurants where you can't gop wrong - almost

Madsen
20 Old Brompton Road, London SW7, 020 7225 2772

Actually, nearly everything at this new Danish near the museums of South 
Kensington is very good. What not to order is the snitter, which is 
canapé-sized smørrebrød. But only because anyone aged over five years old feels 
silly saying, 'Can I have the snitter, please?'

Il Castello
Piazza Castello, Sassari, Sardinia, Italy, 0039 79 23 20 41

Fancy a winter break in Sardinia? Why not? The weather is good, the hotels are 
discounted and the local fare is ... interesting. What not to order at popular 
restaurant Il Castello? The costata di cavallo, which translates as rib of 
horse. Unless you like the musty stable-door, ancient taste of horsemeat.

Crooked Billet
Newlands Lane, Stoke Row, Henley-on-Thames, 01491 681048

Deservedly won an Observer Food Monthly award for its beefy Sunday lunches. Do 
not overlook as a venue for midweek trysts. Portions are generous, romance is 
in the air. However, meat dishes seem a better bet than the fish ones, so don't 
order the halibut.

• These restaurants and hundreds more are on Jan's restaurant website, 
areyoureadytoorder.co.uk <http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk>
