
It feels like the end of something. Certainly it's the end of summer, although 
it hasn't been summer since July. It's also the end of my maternity leave. In 
just over a week I will be back at work and my arms will be empty of Flora.

I count down the days I have left with her, inhaling her milky smell and 
kissing her almost too fiercely. "I've never seen you happier than over the 
past seven months," a friend tells me, unhelpfully.

We both agree that if I was a full-time mother I'd become increasingly bored. 
But neither of us believes it. "You can become a full-time mum again when you 
retire," says J. "Flora will probably still be at primary school. How weird is 
that?"

We end the school holiday at my mother's house. When life is changing, it's 
comforting to go home. On the way, the girls argue about the fairness of who is 
sitting where in the car. I'm struck by the ferocity of their assault on each 
other. "That's it," I say firmly. "For every mean thing you say about each 
other, you have to say three good things."

"What if you can't think of three good things?" asks Tilly.

"Well, you have to pay the other person £3," I say.

"Is being outgoing a good thing?" asks Tilly.

Lydia decides on Tilly being pretty, having fashion sense and being good at 
Sims 3. "I did hope for something deeper," I tell them.

As we get closer to my mother's house there are memories everywhere. "That's 
the building where I used to sign on," I say, for no other reason than I'm 
surprised to see it has been turned into an ugly pub. "And behind those bushes 
is the house I always wanted to live in when I was a child."

"All I can see is a bush – and what does sign on mean?" says Lydia, 
unimpressed. "Did you go to that Burger King when you were little?"

We didn't because Burger King hadn't come to Britain. But we do take the 
children to the funfair that I went to as a child. I argue with my mother over 
whether the runaway train is the same one that I used to go on.

"It would be more than 45 years old by now," I say. "This can't be the 
original one."

"Yes, it was," my mother insists. "And your father felt sick when he got off 
but you wanted to go on it again and again."

"No, that was the Waltzers." I say heatedly, as if it matters. "You've got the 
rides mixed up."

This is the first year that Lydia wants to go on the Klondike Gold Rush – a 
rollercoaster that goes upside down. She begs Sam, who is 22, to go with her.

I may fight with my eldest about his refusal to get a job or even get out of 
bed, but there are things I admire about him. That he'll hang out with his 
younger sisters at a relatively tame funfair without being cynical is one of 
them.

I peer over the fence to watch Lydia. Sam has his arm around her, and I'm 
struck by the look on his face. So often I am nagging him; so often he looks 
browbeaten (with justification), but now, as the rollercoaster soars, his face 
is smiling and carefree. I remember what a happy child he was and I cry, but 
only a little because I am standing next to a big tattooed man with a large 
dog, and don't want to alarm them.

When the ride ends, Lydia begs for another go. Sam, knowing maternity leave 
has made me mindful of money, shushes her. "Well, maybe you can go on by 
yourself," he says. "I don't need another go."

But I can still see his face, beaming.

"No, you do need another go," I say firmly. "You do."
