
I once went skiing, but I was so frightened that I threw myself to the ground 
whenever I picked up speed. I've since had a recurring nightmare about being 
stuck at the top of a mountain, with a sheer drop just inches from the piste. 
But this winter I decided to give mountain sports one last chance. I'd made a 
pact with myself to skip the monotonous gym routine and find more interesting 
ways to get some exercise – as well as a bigger adrenaline rush than you get 
from a cross-trainer. Tamworth Snowdome claims to be able to teach people to 
learn how to snowboard in just one day – exactly the sort of non-committal 
approach I like. Still, to be completely out of my comfort zone strapped to a 
board at the top of a mountain, even a fake one, is a terrifying proposition.

It's a tough schedule, from 9am until 5pm, but, by the end of it, I am told I 
will be a "recreational snowboarder, with the ability to use all lifts, perform 
controlled linked turns, control speed and direction, and stop confidently". It 
sounds like a very big promise.

The SnowDome, just off the A5 in Staffordshire, was the UK's first full-size 
indoor ski centre and will celebrate its 10th anniversary next year. The 
170-metre slope is lined with real snow and as I walk through the doors the 
temperature plunges – I can see my breath puff out in front of me. Looking up, 
I'm instantly reassured by the walls at the edges of the slope: no sheer drops 
in sight.

Andy, our instructor, comes to greet us. His laid-back demeanor puts us at 
ease, even when the first fall of the day occurs in the corridor as we try out 
our boards for size.

We're then led up the slope on foot, and stop midway for Andy to explain the 
basics. If you point your board straight down the slope, you pick up speed. The 
control, he says, comes from positioning it horizontally across the slope, 
tilting forwards or backwards with your toes or heels.

That's easier said than done. Having your feet strapped in place as you launch 
yourself down a hill is not a natural feeling. The first few attempts are so 
slow and cautious that Andy is able to hold our hands all the way, like a human 
safety blanket.

Up and down we go, gradually gaining confidence, learning to control our 
speed. With its strip lighting and energy-drink billboards, the SnowDome 
doesn't really pass for a mountain, but I'm so focused on my own feet I quickly 
forget where I am. We attempt a full run from the top just once, and despite my 
snail-pace it's oddly terrifying, though exhilirating too – especially once 
I've made it down in one piece. Midway through the afternoon, a couple of hours 
after lunch, I'm seriously flagging. But the ever-patient Andy clocks my 
cowboy-like gait and suggests a tea break just in time.

With one hour left, we're ready for our final challenge and the ultimate goal 
of the course: to perform S-shaped turns down the slope. Unfortunately, I only 
seem to get midway through my S, before panicking and crumpling in a heap. 
"Stand taller! Don't crouch!" Andy calls. Suddenly, something clicks. I make a 
complete S! Sort of ... if the S were drawn by someone holding a pencil in 
their teeth.

The clock hits 5pm. Mission accomplished? Pretty much. I'm no natural, but 
I've made enough progress to want to come again. It's been an intense, 
full-body workout. The next day, I hobble out of bed and can barely lift my 
arms to put on a jumper. A snow centre may not be the great outdoors, but it's 
certainly more invigorating than my usual jog around the block.

• Tamworth Snowdome's Learn to Snowboard in a Day course costs from £169pp, 
including lunch and refreshments. Group lessons start at £60. 08448 000011;
snowdome.co.uk <http://snowdome.co.uk>

Over to you: share your winter sports photos and videos

Inspired by Vicky's snowboarding success, we would love you to share photos 
and videos of you or your friends taking part in winter sports. From skiing, to 
ice skating, nailing a halfpipe to falling flat on your face, anything goes as 
long as it's icy.

And don't forget to tell us all about it too: we want to know what sport you 
did and where, how you got on and whether you're a pro or a total noob.

The best contributions will feature in the February issue of Do Something, the 
Guardian's brand new monthly activities magazine. Please upload hi-res images 
so that we can publish them in print.

To take part, just click on the blue "contribute" button or download the free 
GuardianWitness app for your smartphone.
