
Buenos Aires now has more boutique hotels than you can shake a polo whip at. 
Unfortunately, it also has surging rates of inflation that now puts them out of 
reach for more budget-conscious visitors. So where does this leave the 
traveller who wants a place with a comfy bed, a clean shower and plenty of 
character, but who could happily skip the in-house spa and room service?

If you hunt around (and not necessarily just in the usual hotspots), there are 
still some good deals to be had. San Telmo and Palermo remain the most popular 
areas to stay in, but you can easily save a substantial number of pesos by 
staying a few blocks down the road, while getting more of abarrio 
(neighbourhood) feel too.

Pop Hotel, Villa Crespo 

As the name suggests, pop art is the theme here in Buenos Aires' "first budget 
boutique hotel". It opened late last year in the emerging Villa Crespo 
neighbourhood, which has a scattering of hip cafes and inventive restaurants 
but without the tourist saturation of nearby Palermo. Clean, fresh and urban, 
the 44-room property doesn't let you forget where you are: its "pop" logo 
branded on to everything from the hangers to the soaps. You also get plenty of 
modern extras too, including an iPod dock and a security safe that's "big 
enough for a laptop". Breakfast involves taking a voucher to a cafe down the 
road, which is unusual but no real inconvenience.
• +54 11 4776 6900, pophotelsbuenosaires.com 
<http://www.pophotelsbuenosaires.com/>. Doubles from around £57 per night 
(special offer of three nights for the price of two available)

Bed and Breakfast Ada & Valentyn, Monserrat, bordering San Telmo
 Bed and Breakfast Ada & Valentyn, Buenos Aires 
Stepping inside this century-old apartment block and pulling the cage door 
across the old-fashioned lift takes you back to Buenos Aires of yesteryear. 
Another newcomer to the scene, this B&B is immaculately clean, with high 
ceilings, polished wooden floors and vintage furniture that has been hand 
restored by the owners. The building is also surprisingly quiet considering you 
are just a couple of blocks from Plaza de Mayo, the site of almost daily 
protests about one thing or another. Tango fanatics Ada and Valentyn (a 
multilingual couple from Argentina and Holland respectively) are full of 
enthusiasm about their new venture and go out of their way to help guests enjoy 
their stay. All visitors are invited to join them on their Friday evening trip 
to amilonga (tango dancehall). 
• +54 11 4343 6251, bedandbreakfastbuenosaires.com 
<http://bedandbreakfastbuenosaires.com/>. Doubles from £35, singles from £22

Lola House, Boedo
 Lola House, Buenos Aires 
Painted a sunny shade of yellow, this colonial house is designed in the 
"chorizo" style, meaning it extends back from a central patio like a sausage. 
Situated in Boedo, an oft-forgotten barrio to the south, its single-storey 
frontage opens out to reveal 12 en suite rooms. Original decorations such as 
Spanish tiles and stained glass windows give it a personality that is 
characteristicallyporteño (of Buenos Aires). With a Subte (metro) stop just 
around the corner, you are a 10-minute ride from San Telmo. Currently, the huge 
terrace has no outdoor seating, which seems like a missed opportunity, but 
apparently some changes are afoot.
• +54 11 4932 2139, lolahouse.com.ar <http://www.lolahouse.com.ar/>. Singles 
from £57, double £70, triples £86

Abode, Palermo
 Abode, Buenos Aires 
If you want to stay in the heart of Palermo Soho (home to all the flashest 
boutiques, restaurants and bars), but don't fancy paying through nose, this 
down-to-earth, British-run B&B is your answer. Having the 50-square-metre 
"grand suite" here feels like having your own apartment. Breakfast is served on 
the upstairs terrace, which is surrounded by pot plants and is a suntrap even 
in winter. Hosts David and Zoe are renowned for their local knowledge and 
attentive service.
•+54 11 4774 3331, abodebuenosaires.com <http://www.abodebuenosaires.com/>. 
Doubles from £57 per night B&B

Casa los Angelitos, Balvanera, one block from the Congress building
 Casa los Angelitos, Buenos Aires 
Chatty porteño owner Sergio runs this place with his retired parents, who live 
here and give this place a real family feel. It is best suited to stays of a 
month or more, but you may get lucky with some short-term availability, 
especially off season. The rooms come together at the central patio, which is 
surrounded by exposed-brick walls and plenty of greenery. Breakfast is not 
included, instead you get use of the kitchen, shared with other guests and the 
hosts. It's like a mature hostel, attracting guests of all ages, and is a great 
spot for those sticking around to learn Spanish or tango.
• +54 11 4954 4079, casalosangelitos.com 
<http://www.casalosangelitos.com/english/>. Double rooms from £13 per person 
per night

Petit Hotel El Vitraux, Constitución/Monserrat
 Petit Hotel El Vitraux, Buenos Aires 
Argentinian owner Elena is like a whirlwind of buena onda (friendliness). She 
opened this place with her Dutch partner, Mark, five months ago, and although 
it is still a bit of a work in progress, a warm welcome is guaranteed. The 
90-year-old house has just three guest rooms – all painted lively shades – so 
there is no chance of feeling like just another anonymous guest. There's a 
small shady patio downstairs for taking breakfast or an early evening glass of 
Argentine wine, plus an additional roof terrace with giant ferns, hibiscus, 
lime trees and an occasional visiting hummingbird. Note that from here you'll 
want to walk towards Monserrat/San Telmo, rather than the rougher part of 
Constitución.
• +54 11 2064 9354, petithotelelvitraux.com.ar 
<http://www.petithotelelvitraux.com.ar/>. Rooms from £25 per night

Livian Guesthouse, Palermo
 Livian guesthouse, Buenos Aires 
If this stylish guesthouse were just a couple of blocks down the road, it 
would probably cost double the price. It's situated on the outer edges of 
Palermo, meaning you have to walk a little bit to be in the centre of the 
action, but there are advantages to being on a quiet residential street. This 
1920s property is the converted childhood home of owner, Lucila, a former 
gymnast, who transformed it with her husband, Fernando, a former soap opera 
star. It's filled with arty touches and retro furniture, plus the large back 
garden provides a welcome oasis.
• +54 11 4862 8841, livianguesthouse.com.ar 
<http://www.livianguesthouse.com.ar/>. Doubles from £44 (shared bathroom) or 
from £73 (en suite and little private garden)

Luba Tango House, Palermo

Many guests have said staying here feels like having your own Argentinian 
mother for a few days, and host Luba relishes this role. She started welcoming 
travellers into her home (and guests stay in the rooms of her grown-up 
children) to make ends meet after the 2001 economic crisis hit the country. 
Argentine homes tend to be filled with chunky furniture and hand-me-downs 
rather than Ikea-style home assembly kits and this is no exception. The 
sideboards are covered with family photos and personal knickknacks. Luba also 
has the low-down on the milongas within in walking distance.
• +54 11 4831 2654, lubatangohouse.com <http://lubatangohouse.com.ar/>. 
Singles from £19, doubles from £35

Teresita B&B, Adrogué, Zona Sur
 Photograph (right): Beatrice Murch 
Around 9 million people live in greater Buenos Aires, yet very few tourists 
travel outside the city core. Adrogué is a middle-class suburb south of the 
centre, 30 minutes by train. There are just two little cottages at bottom of 
the garden, both en suite – so you really do get away from it all. The only 
time you realise that you are not the only tourist in Gran Buenos Aires is when 
host Teresa opens the door to cookery students. You can join in to learn how to 
make empanadas or a real Argentinian barbecue (from £35 per person).
• +54 11 4293 5992, gotraveltoargentina.com 
<http://www.gotraveltoargentina.com/>. Double from £40 per night B&B

San Telmo Loft, San Telmo
 San Telmo Loft Buenos Aires 
Minimalism rarely works in Buenos Aires. Such a vibrant, creative city is 
reflected better through bright colours and bold statements. Fortunately, San 
Telmo Loft knows to take the second route, opting for a modern but cosy design. 
It isn't a hotel; it's an apartment rental service, run by an 
Argentinian-American team. They started with one "loft" in central San Telmo, 
just off atmospheric Plaza Dorrego, and now have a small number of similarly 
stylish properties on their books. Instead of getting a key from an impersonal 
agent, you'll be met by one of the company owners, who'll have plenty of 
insider knowledge on the neighbourhood and beyond.
• santelmoloft.com <http://santelmoloft.com/>. Approx £44 a night

Do you know any affordable places to stay in Buenos Aires? Add your 
recommendation in the comments below
