
Frederick Horniman was a Victorian tea trader and avid collector of art and 
artefacts, objects and specimens from across the world. In 1901 he donated his 
collection, and the museum that housed it, to London County Council “for the 
instruction and enjoyment” of Londoners, on condition entry should always be 
free.

At the Horniman Museum <http://www.horniman.ac.uk/> in Forest Hill you’ll find 
totem poles and textiles, pan pipes and puppets, death masks and a dodo model. 
There are cabinets of curiosities, dioramas of startled and stuffed wildlife. 
You can see the remains of a 19th century male mermaid, a merman, which is 
actually a composite of fish, bird and papier-mache. The Horniman is truly a 
place of wonder, a place where science, art and the imagination walk hand in 
hand.

Related: 'We must do all we can to value and protect our creative output' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/apr/18/value-protect-creative-industry-globalisation>

 One of the star attractions is an awkward looking stuffed walrus. The huge 
Horniman walrus sits rather uncomfortably atop a fibreglass iceberg. When you 
first encounter him he peers mournfully back at you. He seems stretched and 
over-stuffed and he lacks a walrus’s characteristic wrinkles and skin folds. 
It’s as if he’s had a few too many chai lattes or is the victim of a bizarre 
Botox accident.

 It transpires that when in the late 1880s the Horniman walrus’s carcass was 
brought to Britain, the local taxidermists had never seen a live walrus. So 
they just speculated on its natural appearance.

 One can imagine the conversation: “Dave, this walrus here must have been a 
phenomenal beast. The boss is very excited about it. Any idea what it should 
look like?” “No, Pete, just fill him up as best you can. I’m sure that’ll be 
fine.”

How many of us operating in marketing and communications over the years, 
working with new technologies and media, have created our own Horniman 
walruses? How often have we endeavoured to put a new platform at the heart of 
our plans without being entirely confident what best to do with it?

During the dot.com boom, I worked with numerous small businesses that thought 
they should advertise on TV, and with a large energy company that thought it 
should be a portal. There was subsequently a rush to build brand websites that 
few consumers visited and to populate them with branded entertainment that few 
consumers watched. We enthused aboutFriendster 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friendster>, MySpace 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myspace> and Google+ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google-plus>. And our agency senior 
team once presented our future plans via avatars on Second Life.

So I’m not sure you’d want to ask me, for example, to find an optimal use of 
Periscope, Snapchat or 360 degree video. I’m aware that these technologies are 
current, popular and important. But as a man of a certain age, I’ve not 
properly experienced them in the wild. I could probably stuff the platforms 
with marketing strategy, expert acronyms and futuristic confidence. But would 
it look natural?

Inevitably we assume that we’d be better off entrusting our marketing on new 
platforms to young people who are fluent in applications and algorithms. 
However, it’s far from easy locating a role for brand marketing in new 
channels. Often they resist more obvious commercial engagement. We may find 
that our digital natives are not sufficiently experienced in the art and craft 
of brand communication to crack the conundrum.

To put it crudely, if you want to stuff a walrus you need both people who know 
their walruses and people who know their taxidermy.

I’m increasingly of the view that times of transformational change require 
cross-generational expertise: teams that integrate youthful understanding of 
new platforms with the marketing wisdom of more mature heads.

We talk a good deal nowadays about creative partnerships: reaching across the 
divides of channel, technology and specialism. But maybe, in this neophile era 
and industry, we don’t talk enough about collaborations that embrace a spectrum 
of age and experience.

Perhaps the Horniman walrus, at the ripe old age of 150 or so, still has 
something to teach us.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<http://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
