
Meryl Streep’s daughter Mamie Gummer is to star in Amazon Prime’s new fashion 
drama The Collection.

Created by Desperate Housewives and Ugly Betty showrunner Oliver Goldstick, 
The Collection is set in a Parisian fashion house just after the end of the 
second world war.

Centred around the two brothers who run the family business it also stars The 
Lady In the Van and Harry Potter actor Frances de la Tour, who plays scheming 
matriarch Yvette Sabine.

The brothers Paul and Claude are played, respectively, by Crossbones actor 
Richard Coyle and Tom Riley, whose previous credits include Da Vinci’s Demons 
and Monroe.

Gummer, who is probably best known to viewers for playing Nancy Crozier in hit 
US series The Good Wife, takes on the role of Paul’s wife Helen in The 
Collection, while Jenna Thiam, who was in French drama The Returned, also 
features as the face of the fashion house’s label.

Also appearing in the series are Mistresses star Sarah Parish and Foyle’s War 
actor Michael Kitchen.

Goldstick described The Collection as “an entrepreneurial fable set at a 
pivotal moment in France’s history when fashion truly became a vehicle for 
transformation and reinvention.

“At its heart, it is the story of a volatile family who pay a steep price for 
their ambition – and this “family” encompasses not only the name on the label, 
but the devoted workers who execute the master’s vision. Postwar Paris was a 
chaotic era of stark contrasts – hope and romance was in the air, but the 
shadow of the Occupation and its moral recriminations also haunted the city. In 
this divisive world, mystery and secrets abound; knowing too much can cost you 
a lot - even your life.”

The Collection is being made by Lookout Point, which co-produced BBC1’s 
acclaimed War and Peace and also makes Ripper Street for Amazon.

Chief executive Simon Vaughan said: “It’s very liberating that as an industry 
we can tell stories from literally anywhere now. War and Peace was 1812 Russia 
and now we are heading to postwar Paris, creating a global drama full of 
political and historical French context, yet shot in English with a truly 
magnificent ensemble from the UK, US and France.

 “This is a far-reaching story, and the allure of Paris in 1948 with the 
sumptuous design and detail we are able to bring to that world, both front of 
house and in the workrooms, has proven to be a wonderfully alluring proposition 
for cast and crew and something we have never quite seen before on TV.”

Coyle said of his part: “Paul Sabine is a multi-layered and conflicted 
‎character, with a dark secret in his past which threatens to destroy the 
fashion empire he is building. He is a puppet-master on the brink of 
superstardom, trying to implement his bold new vision while keeping the doors 
closed on the skeletons threatening to burst out.”

 Filming has begun in Paris and Wales and the show will be available to Amazon 
Prime viewers in the UK later this year.
