
Well done, Mr X. A good term’s work. I thought shagging the female teaching 
assistant would be off-limits. Especially when she was my wife.

Combine that with the fact that two of our children had already passed through 
your class and that our youngest child was still at the school and, well, I 
guess I thought that this might have preyed on your conscience.

Isn’t there some code of conduct or ethics that you are supposed to follow 
about that kind of thing? Even as a human being, let alone a teacher.

You know what? People fall in love. They do. It happens. That I can live with. 
After all, you were a single young man in a school dominated by female staff.

She was a vibrant, fetching older woman who clearly found you attractive, as 
evidenced by the enormous blush that used to bloom across her chest and neck 
when we came to parents’ evenings. Beautiful women are sometimes obvious 
despite themselves; you get used to it. Of course, I would shake your hand 
telling you “good job with my daughter and thank you”. Don’t doubt that I meant 
it.

And then there was the husband (yes, that’s me) – stressed over-achiever, 
focused on being a provider for his wife and children and missing (completely, 
it seems) some needs in her, as she was missing needs in me. Like I say, it 
happens.

In the depth of your affair, when you were both in complete denial – telling 
lies and all that goes with that particular territory – how did you reconcile 
the fact that my youngest child was coming home from your school, sharing that 
she had been taught the values of respect and honesty by you, yes you, in 
assembly with what you were actually doing to her family?

So why write? Well, as you know, I found, by foul means or fair, all of the 
text messages between you. In that moment, I knew grief and rage. My children’s 
lives changed for ever. They will live with the fact that their mummy had an 
affair with their teacher. Yes, they know.

And this is the point. Not once in those text messages did either of you 
mention the children and the impact of your behaviour on them. Those texts told 
the story of two adult teachers acting like the children they purport to care 
for. Poor you sought her reassurance; so desperately worried that you would be 
seen as a home wrecker and anxious that you would lose your job.

“Sois calme,” she counselled, fretting only that I, the big bad beastie 
husband, would find out and wreck both your careers and reputations.

Sometimes I wish I had. Wreck your career? Is that what matters? She protected 
you over me, over our children, over everything we had ever worked for. Is that 
not enough? Not once did either of you consider them, their feelings, their 
lives. Not one text about how they might feel. The people they should be able 
to trust and respect most in the world, completely and utterly betrayed them.

When I discovered the full extent of your relationship and confronted you, 
asking you if you loved her, you fumbled and bumbled. You said you were very 
fond of her at first, then you grudgingly admitted that you did love her after 
I pushed you on it.

I then suggested (although every male instinct in my body was telling me to do 
something I would regret) that if you loved each other as you appeared to, then 
you should embrace it because love like that is rare and precious, and I would 
help with the children.

I called you out and what did you do?

You walked – no, ran – away. Left her stranded. You changed jobs. A petty, 
sneaky thief in the night. She is a proud woman, so I am sure she made it easy 
for you.

You see, I deeply loved my ex-wife and mother of my children, and if she could 
have been honest and respectful then maybe we could all have salvaged some 
dignity and protected the children. You both had many, many opportunities. You 
chose not to.

Life has changed for us all so very much. The house has gone, friends are 
split, family split. And so it goes, the emotional brutality of betrayal and 
divorce.

My ex-wife and I are both alone; we barely have a relationship. You carry on 
masquerading as a pillar of society, no doubt.

But, despite all the unnecessary pain and disturbance in their lives, my 
children are doing wonderfully and are well adjusted. They will grow up to be 
fine, upstanding and morally courageous people.

Maybe one day, Mr X, you will too.

Anonymous
