
Chez Wong, Lima

Chef Javier Wong taught me the essence of ceviche. He started his restaurant 
in the garage of his house and it has expanded from there. He is the only chef 
in the kitchen and his restaurant has no menu. He only cooks using sole and he 
only offers these options: hot or cold, sweet or sour. It opens for lunch only 
and you should book in advance. You could as easily find yourself sitting next 
to a top Peruvian politician or the plasterer working at the building site next 
door.
• Calle Enrique Leon Garcia 114, +511 470 6217, facebook.com/ChezJavierWong 
<https://www.facebook.com/ChezJavierWong>. Average meal £30

Amaz, Lima
 Amaz, Peru 
This place is run by Pedro Schiaffino, who in my mind is the most pioneering 
chef in Peru right now.Malabar 
<http://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/sep/21/peru-lima-food-restaurants-revolution>
, his first restaurant, is ranked in the 100 of the world's best restaurants 
and at Amaz he focuses entirely on Amazonian food. This is a groundbreaking 
restaurant, offering one of the most exciting types of cuisine. I once had an 
incredible hollowed-out bamboo with prawn ceviche roasted inside. But it's not 
all so theatrical – it's mostly about the ingredients. Try chonta, which looks 
like a thin, silky pasta but is a type of palm.
• Avenida La Paz 1079, +511 221 9393, amaz.com.pe <http://amaz.com.pe/>. 
Average meal £50

La Nueva Palomino, Arequipa
 Photograph: Martin Morales 
Peruvian food has Inca and pre-Inca traditions at its base, and since then 
waves of immigration – Spanish, Japanese, Chinese, Italian, African – have 
helped create a unique cuisine. This family-run restaurant, in Peru's 
second-biggest city, takes Peruvian food back to its origins, and in a way I 
have never seen before. The restaurant dates back to the 1890s and the owner is 
more of an historian than a chef. Everything is cooked by hand, on log fires. 
Instead of an electric blender, they use abatán, like a pestle and mortar. Try 
thechupe de camarones (prawn chowder) with quinoa. Or the rocoto relleno: 
stuffed chilli peppers, with mince beef and pecans.
• Leoncio Prado 122, +51 54252393. Average meal £20

El Mercado, Lima
 El Mercado, Lima, Peru 
Avenida La Mar is known as the street of the ceviche and it is always packed 
in the middle of the day. Ceviche is historically a lunchtime dish and although 
that has changed this restaurant keeps to old habits by only opening for lunch. 
Run by a top chef and author Rafael Osterling, it offers flavourful fine-dining 
at accessible prices. The food, presentation and service are all of a very high 
standard. Although it calls itself a ceviche restaurant, it offers much more. 
Try the grilled octopus and the fish roe sandwich.
• Hipólito Unanue 203, +511 221 1322,rafaelosterling.pe 
<http://www.rafaelosterling.pe/es/el-mercado.html>. Average meal £40

La Tia Grimanesa, Lima

Grimanesa Vargas started as a humble street cart many years ago and her 
anticuchos (beef-heart skewers), a traditional dish that came from 
African-Peruvians, became known as the best in Lima. With a marinade perfectly 
blending smokey chilli, red-wine vinegar and garlic, she had queues forming 
round the block. Demand was so great, she even started to take bookings on her 
mobile. This led to her own restaurant, which is thriving. She has now become a 
cult hero in Lima, as popular as any pop star.
• Jr Ignacio Merino 466, +51 99 849 3137, grimanesavargasanticuchos.com 
<http://www.grimanesavargasanticuchos.com/>. Average meal £10

Maido Restaurante, Lima
 Photograph: Gisella Benavides 
The fusion of Peruvian and Japanese cuisine is no flash in the pan. In 1899, 
the first Japanese migrants sailed to Peru and soon created their first 
restaurants. The hybrid cuisine that followed even earned its own name: 
Peruvian nikkei. Mitsuharu Tsumura is one of the best of a new breed of chefs 
taking nikkei forward. His playful fusion dishes are the centrepiece of his 
tasting menu, which I consider to be one of the best in the world. It's quite 
unlike anything in Japan, perfectly refined using European fine-dining 
techniques and presentation skills, alongside Japanese and Peruvian traditions.
• Calle San Martín 399, +511 446 2512, maido.pe <http://www.maido.pe>. Average 
meal £65

El Rincon Que No Conoces, Lima
 Photograph: Martin Morales 
This place was started by Teresa Izquierdo, who sadly passed away in 2011, and 
who was affectionately known as the mother of Peruvian food. This lunchtime 
restaurant serves Peru's traditional dishes at a high level of quality for 
locals and travellers. Thecarapulcra – an African-Peruvian dish of potato, 
peanut and pork – is legendary. Its coriander lamb stew is also delicious, as 
are the picarones (pumpkin doughnuts).
• Calle Bernardo Alcedo 363, +511 471 2171, elrinconquenoconoces.pe 
<http://www.elrinconquenoconoces.pe>. Average meal £25 

San Pedro Market, Cusco
 San Pedro Market, Cuzco. Photograph: Alamy 
The ancient Inca city of Cusco is the jump-off point for Machu Picchu and the 
Sacred valley. Don't leave without spending some time at the indoor market. 
It's packed with great food stalls and has a really exciting atmosphere. The 
juice vendors have a mind-boggling array of fruits (my favourite is the tropical
guanabana) and there's a trend to fill them with all manner of additional 
ingredients, from quinoa to stout. The breads are great too: try the ones 
twisted into the shape of a child, with a marzipan face. If you visit, consider 
giving an extra tip toAmantani.org.uk <http://www.amantani.org.uk>, an 
organisation doing great work to help local people, especially street children.

Al Frio y Al Fuego, Iquitos
 The river Amazon at the port in Iquitos. Photograph: Alamy 
The best ceviche I've ever eaten was not on the coast of Peru but in Iquitos, 
in the heart of the Amazon. It was made ofpaiche fish (a fish now being called 
by many "the new black cod"). I haven't been to Al Frio y Al Fuego but I've 
heard great things, so travellers heading that way should certainly add it to 
their list. As well as offering great river seafood, the location is 
incredible; it's actually a floating restaurant on the river Itaya and to get 
there you have to travel by boat. If you go to Iquitos, make sure you also 
check out Belen market for tasty juices and fish dishes.
• Avenida La Marina N 134-B, +51 65 607474, alfrioyalfuego.com 
<http://www.alfrioyalfuego.com>. Average meal £25

Main Street, Lurín

Chicharrones (confit pork belly) are a street-food favourite in many parts of 
Peru but the district of Lurín is said to have the tastiest. It's less than an 
hour's drive from Lima and is conveniently placed on the way to the southern 
beaches, just off the Pan-American highway. It's well worth stopping off. It's 
hard to pick a favourite; try any of the simple roadside restaurants and 
prepare for the amazing mix of pork, sweet potato andsalsa criolla (a blend of 
onion, lime, chilli and coriander), with or without a crusty roll.

Martin Morales is founder of Peruvian restaurants Ceviche 
<http://cevicheuk.com/> and Andina <http://WWW.ANDINALONDON.COM> in London
