
Young art historians are struggling to spot subtle but crucial differences 
between paintings by masters with similar styles because of the gradual demise 
of connoisseurship in academic art history, according to a leading expert in 
the field.

Universities are no longer training historians to tell their William Hogarth 
from their Francis Hayman, says Brian Allen, former director of the Paul Mellon 
Centre for Studies in BritishArt 
<http://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign>, and a trustee of the 
National Portrait Gallery. Instead students are being asked to focus on the 
social history of art.

“There are increasingly few younger art historians who are comfortable at 
being asked to make attributional statements,” he says. “Rather than studying
Canaletto <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/canaletto>, a student is 
more likely to focus on some aspect of the sociology of view painting in 
18th-century Europe.”

Allen says he is increasingly alarmed by young art historians who look 
“perplexed” if faced with a questionable picture. “It’s an area they haven’t 
really been schooled to do. There’s an element of fear.”

While social history is interesting, he says, it is only through recognising 
“the tiniest stylistic quirks” that historians can differentiate between, for 
example, certain paintings by Canaletto and his nephew and assistant Bellotto, 
which can look very similar. “One of the ways you can tell the difference is 
that Bellotto paints dogs in a completely different way. All these things seem 
pedantic – but it [connoisseurship] is pedantry in a way.”

One of the consequences of art historians being unable to distinguish between 
the hand of a master, an assistant or a copyist is that forgeries will be 
missed, says Allen.

He now fears that other subject areas “will fall into obscurity”. “If you look 
at the number of doctoral theses being produced in pre-20th-century art, it’s 
diminishing very rapidly. People are opting to do what you might call easier 
subject areas. If you’re writing about contemporary art, you don’t really need 
a body of knowledge to the same extent.”

Now, Allen claims, some of the best scholars coming through in the field of 
British art are from Italy, where, he says, they have a much more conventional 
classical education: “They’re better equipped to deal with the rigours of older 
art where you have to know languages, classical mythology, Greek and Roman 
history,” he says. “So many of our [art history] students these days have got 
almost none of those fundamental skills. It’s simply the way education has 
changed.”

The change to art history education started to happen in the early 1980s when 
the traditional focus on scrutinising paintings started to be replaced by a 
social history of the subject. “This has taken a kind of stranglehold on the 
way the history of art is taught,” says Allen. “Its exponents simply believe 
that connoisseurship and that kind of monographic art history has its 
limitations.”

The demise in connoisseurship has long concerned Allen – 25 years ago, he 
says, he warned that soon there would be no connoisseurs in the history of 
British art left. Now, he thinks this has almost come true. “There’s hardly 
anybody left,” he says.

His alarm extends beyond education to public collections. In a stinging rebuke 
to one of the country’s most prominent art institutions, the Tate, Allen 
believes it no longer has any “real experts” on British art. He is referring to 
the gallery’s decision in 2012 to lose Ian Warrell, a world authority on 
Turner, Anne Lyles, an expert on Constable, and Karen Hearn, a specialist in 
17th-century art.

Responding to his criticisms, a Tate spokeswoman said: “Tate’s curatorial team 
comprises highly respected world experts specialising in British art from 1500 
to the present day. Their scholarship and expertise is central to our 
exhibitions and displays programme, and integral to developing and 
understanding the collection. Rigorous research underpins all our activities at 
Tate.”

Allen will deliver his full condemnation of what he sees as the demise of 
traditional art history at a conference onArt, Law and Crises of Connoisseurship
 <http://artwatch.org.uk/art-law-and-crises-of-connoisseurship/> that will take 
place on 1 December and has been put together by ArtWatch UK, the art world 
watchdog, the London School of Economics and the Centre for Art Law (US).

Michael Daley, director of ArtWatch UK, says the idea of the conference grew 
from a realisation by various sectors of the art world that scholars were 
“falling down” on the job of monitoring restorations and of correctly 
identifying important artists.

“Art historians are not confident about art any more,” he says. “Nobody’s 
against social history. It is interesting, but if you read the literature now 
on Renoir, it’s all about frocks and society.”

The painting on the left is of the Ducal Palace in Venice by Canaletto. The 
one on the right is of a similar Venetian view by his nephew and assistant 
Bernardo Bellotto
