
I grew up in New Zealand, where every child swims wild. For me, wild swimming 
is anywhere with water and possibilities. It’s somewhere that others might not 
expect to swim. It also means being prepared to swim all year round; not 
something I used to do, but I thought, if my friends at my local lido can do 
it, I can, too.

I started off with a swimming vest, socks and gloves. I was in my early 60s 
and felt a bit scared, but nothing bad happened. Instead, I felt more vibrant 
and alive, and soon became more daring: a walk in the Lake District would turn 
into a swimming opportunity; a lake would beckon and in I’d get.

I’m always sensible; I have someone there to watch me and I’m tentative, 
looking out for rocks and never jumping straight in. Your body quickly adjusts 
and learns what to expect, so you can stay in longer and build your tolerance 
to the temperature. When I first went swimming in winter, I’d do a width and 
get out; then I was able to do lengths. Recently, in Poland, I had to walk 
through snow to get to the lake.

Wild swimming jolts you into the present more than anything I know. It’s the 
best natural high you can have. You get an extraordinary feeling when you’re in 
very deep water with mountains on either side, a sense that you’re at the heart 
of things. There are no age barriers; it’s a shared experience – I go swimming 
with my grandsons in the sea in Hove and my son-in-law joins me now, too. It’s 
quite addictive.

You often find people swimming into their 90s, and that’s because they’re not 
trying to prove anything – they just enjoy it. I’m 69 now, and can’t think of 
many sports you can access for so long in your life. It doesn’t matter what 
shape you’re in, there are no prerequisites. All you need is the confidence to 
get in the water and give it a go.

My weekend workout

Coldest swim Less than 1C, in Poland for the cold water swimming championships.
Favourite temperature 11C.
Ideal post-swim snack Cheese scones at the lido.
Favourite spot Buttermere in the Lake District.
Remotest swim Anglesey.

Five ways to get started: wild swimming

1 Find somewhere lovely nearby – perhaps a river or lake. Try wildswim.com 
<http://www.wildswim.com> to find somewhere appealing. And be safety aware – 
think about currents, tides and water depth. You’ll be a long way from a 
lifeguard.

2 Take someone with you – ideally someone who has swum outdoors before. If you 
don’t know anyone,the Outdoor Swimming Society 
<http://www.outdoorswimmingsociety.com>’s Facebook group 
<https://www.facebook.com/OutdoorSwimmingSociety/> is full of people who 
started out with the post, “I live in X and want to swim outdoors. Can I join 
anyone?”

3 Unless your first outdoor swim is outside the UK, chances are it will be 
chilly. When you take the plunge, prepare to huff and puff at first, but you’ll 
soon acclimatise.

4 Start small, with easy swims and quick dips. Build up knowledge and 
confidence. A trip with an outfit such asSwimTrek <https://www.swimtrek.com> is 
a great way to try more ambitious swims.

5 Be adventurous: rivers, lakes, tarns, moonlight and waterfall swims – all 
can be yours. If you can float, you can swim in all sorts of places and all 
kinds of weather.

 * Interview by Kate Rew.

For more advice, safety and tips, go to outdoorswimmingsociety.com 
<http://www.outdoorswimmingsociety.com>.  Do you have a passion for exercise? 
Send your story tofitness@theguardian.com <mailto:fitness@theguardian.com>
