
Q I start a new job next month and I received a letter today saying we can 
wear casual clothes for the first fortnight while on our induction course. How 
casual is casual?
Frances

A Dress-down Friday or casual day seems to be code for 'you can wear jeans'. 
As smart jeans teamed with a cashmere knit or a ladylike shirt has become the 
Hollywood set's default smart/casual look, why not give that a try? The key is 
to keep it sophisticated, because in this context casual never means scruffy. 
Zara has great shirts; try Joseph and Gap for fine knits. For an on-trend look, 
go for Gap's long-length cardigan or a wool blazer. If jeans just aren't your 
thing, APC has cotton tailored trousers that are smart without being stuffy. 
I'd also recommend that you avoid wearing trainers. Converse says the weekend, 
so go for a wedge, court shoe or patent ballet pump. And remember: it's easier 
to dress an outfit down once you're in an office than to dress it up.

Q I work at an events company and need a cocktail dress for a number of 
upcoming parties for work. I'm 23, and I think a lot of the sparkly dresses in 
the shops look like something my mum would wear. My dad has offered to pay for 
half my outfit, so I can afford about £250-£300.
Suzy

A Luella's whole collection was based on the idea of a rebellious debutante 
and featured items such as a cerise prom dress with customised riding boots for 
a sexy but streetwise look. Why not go for a prom-style dress like this? The 
shape is great, with its cinched waist and full skirt, and the style is fun. 
You can change the look by wearing a dinner jacket over the top, adding 
contrasting tights or a bright clutch, or playing it straight with a simple 
stiletto heel. This is a popular style this season: go for knee length, though, 
as if it's any longer it can look frumpy. I'd look at Marc by Marc Jacobs' red 
satin plaid strapless dress or London label PPQ, which specialises in party 
frocks. My favourite is a black number with a ruffle bodice and full skirt. 
You'll definitely look smart - and nothing like your mum!

· If you have a wardrobe question for Jo Jones, email her at 
ask.jo@observer.co.uk <mailto:ask.jo@observer.co.uk>
