
How do I tell my father in a way he will understand that I don’t want to know 
the details of his love life? We haven’t spoken for two years because, as he 
puts it, if I don’t want to hear his truth, then he doesn’t want to hear mine.

When I was 11, he left our family and had a string of failed relationships. 
Over the years (I’m 37), he has confided in me the particulars of each botched 
romance. For example, starting with his relationship with my mum, I would hear 
about all the things these women did wrong, hurting him, and forcing him to 
look elsewhere for love. There is always a new girlfriend waiting in the wings, 
and I would then hear about how she was so much better for him in every way. 
Inevitably, the cycle would repeat. Then I would have a desperate woman 
attempting to get to my father through me, and my dad crying “poor me” on my 
shoulder, then extolling the virtues of the new woman.

At the age of 35, it occurred to me that my dad sharing his love life with me 
was inappropriate and unhealthy. The latest woman he cheated on with someone 
new had called me a dozen times, crying and begging me to relay love messages 
for her to my dad. My dad, who came to stay with me after being kicked out of 
her house, cried to me and spent hours on the phone in front of me to women old 
and new. I told him I no longer wanted to know about his affairs, he said I was 
an adult and to suck it up. A heated argument ensued. He was so disturbed, I 
thought he would hit me. I told him to leave my home and to never talk to me 
about his sex life again. Hence our not speaking for two years.

Every few months, he sends me a message, more stuff about his love life, to 
which I respond repeatedly my wish to not know about it. He claims I have 
childish anger issues, and need to grow up. This last time, on my birthday, he 
tried to tell me that he’d never cheated on anyone, which is a bald-faced lie, 
but he just won’t take the hint.

I miss the good things about our relationship, but I’m standing my ground on 
this point. However, I wish I had words to convey to him that would allow us to 
resume some kind of communication. Any suggestions?

You could use all the best words but that doesn’t mean your dad will listen to 
them. Your dad sounds histrionic, as if he can only communicate with you if 
there’s something big and dramatic going on. Some parents use illness to get 
their children’s attention – your dad appears to use his relationship woes. Did 
he start doing this when he split with your mum? Was he like this before? Where 
is your mum? Does she have any insight into this?

I think it’s clear your dad has problems with boundaries – he’s going into way 
too much detail with you. And how do the girlfriends get your details? Some 
parents do struggle with this: over-sharing with their children. This is what 
friends are for – not children, however adult. It’s almost as if your father 
needs your validation, over and over again.

Sherylin Thompson, a counselling psychologist who is very good with family 
problems (bacp.co.uk <http://www.bacp.co.uk/>), wonders if your father is 
“struggling to regulate his emotions and needs others to do it for him [by 
telling them what was going on and expecting them to soothe him]”, and if he 
had “limited capacity for understanding the emotions of others and his impact 
on them”. Your dad certainly seems to feel the need to be the centre of 
attention.

What can you do? Thompson suggests that, first, it won’t be a quick fix but 
you could try to “reinforce the part of the relationship that isn’t about 
drama”. She suggests, as an example, when (or if) you remake contact, to say 
how much you are enjoying time with him when you are both doing ordinary 
things; and respond much less to any dramatic stories about his life.

When we talked about the best way to re-establish contact with your dad, we 
both thought that maybe the least dramatic would be best, so if he sends you a 
text, just respond with something like “Shall I pop round on Thursday?”

Thompson also suggests you might want to “reach out to him to give him some 
direction about what you’d like to talk to him about” rather than tell him what 
youdon’t want to talk about. She says that by you telling him you don’t want to 
hear about his romances he may “think you are rejecting him wholesale”. This is 
possible if he’s not that nuanced about emotions.

I wonder if your dad thinks this is how he should relate to his daughter, by 
talking about relationships. And if he wasn’t like this before he left your 
mum, I wonder if he has residual guilt and is trying to say “look how bad I am 
at relationships, look how hard they are, this is why I left”.

Your problems solved


Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into 
personal correspondence.

Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaB <https://twitter.com/AnnalisaB>
