
The formula for the planting is one-third grasses to two-thirds herbaceous 
perennials. One upright grass, such as Calamagrostis x acutiflora 'Karl 
Foerster', was planted for every two groundcover ones.

Each strip of plants swirls out from the centre like the showers of coloured 
sparks thrown out by a catherine wheel. Flowers include yellow rudbeckia and 
Leucanthemum vulgare.

The grass Anemanthele lessoniana is an evergreen companion to the quaking 
grass Briza triloba and the larger Stipa calamagrostis.

In summer, the planting needs virtually no attention and the mower can be 
pushed right up to the skirts of the plants, but at the end of the season, 
weeding can go on for several weeks.

Structural seedheads complement the grasses as they turn wonderful, russet 
hues at this time of year and ensure the maze looks good well into winter.

Mary Dawes requested a rather unconventional present for her 90th birthday 
when she asked garden designer Sarah Morgan to devise a maze for her Kent 
estate, Mount Ephraim in Hernhill. But rather than predictably planting endless 
rows of clipped yew, Morgan employed myriad perennials and grasses in an 
ancient form of labyrinth known as a mizmaze. Dawes is known to her family as 
Miz, so it seemed the perfect gift.

The layout is a giant circle some 80 metres across. There are eight separate 
planting combinations comprising five or six different plant species. The grass 
paths twist and turn, eventually leading to the middle, creating about 20 
incomplete concentric rings of planting. Yet from the outside, the paths are 
barely visible and the labyrinth looks more like an enormous meadow.

This is not, then, a maze to befuddle and disorientate - you can easily look 
over the top of the planting, which is mostly just a few feet high - but it 
takes visitors on a convoluted journey that obliges them to see the planting 
from every conceivable angle. A similar technique could be deployed in a more 
conventional garden, using pathways that lead visitors back on themselves, to 
ensure they experience all the views (mountephraimgardens.co.uk 
<http://www.mountephraimgardens.co.uk>).
