
They met at the school gate in Whissonsett, Sarah Savage and Penny Tyson, 
chatting away about this and that, as you do. Penny had run a photographers' 
agency in London and Sarah had had a deli in Norwich. And then, as you do, 
their respective families had upped sticks and relocated to the quieter 
pastures of rural Norfolk. Being young, they still had a certain amount of 
energy. And being used to running their own businesses, they had a certain 
commercial nous. So they decided on a joint venture. But whatever it was they 
were going to do, it would have to fit round school runs and their children's 
activities. Hearth and home came first, business second. Flexibility was the 
key. "And it had to be fun." Jam making was the answer, jams, chutneys and 
relishes.

But there is an ocean of difference between making jams, chutneys and relishes 
for domestic consumption and making them to a consistent standard for sale. 
That thought didn't deter Sarah and Penny, who exude an air of calm good humour 
and cheerful confidence. "We've both been cooking for more than 25 years," 
Penny says. "So we pretty much know what we're doing," Sarah adds. Talking to 
them, you sort of know that they'd succeed at whatever they turned their hand 
to.

They turned their hand to jam making in 2005. They made it - still do - in 
small batches in gleaming copper pans ("Much better heat distribution," Sarah 
says) in Penny's domestic kitchen. It makes an unlikely industrial unit. It's a 
good size, but not large. It's light and sensible, with blond wood worktops, 
brushed stainless-steel equipment, cream walls and units, and pictures of and 
by Penny's children decorating the walls. It might feature in House & Garden 
were it not for the domestic clutter. But out of this kitchen stream pots of 
award-winning preserves, high in fruit, low in sugar, in small batches, about 
25 jars a batch, 600 pots a week, weighing 227g apiece.

These are crafted products if ever there were. Everything is made by hand. A 
wooden spoon represents the height of advanced technology. They even use the 
time-honoured, saucer-and-wrinkle method, rather than high technology or even a 
thermometer, to judge whether a product is ready for the jar. The batch is 
ladled into the jars by hand. The lids are closed by hand, the labels (designed 
at home) stuck on by hand and the finished pots packed by hand, before being 
sent off to delis, farms shops and National Trust tea rooms in East Anglia.

This isn't your run-of-the-mill glop to spoon on to toast. For a start, Penny 
and Sarah don't do single- flavour jams. "There are plenty of those around 
already," they say. They're free spirits when it comes to flavour combinations: 
among their jams are Strawberry & Rose, Seville & Lavender, Peach Melba, Black 
Forest, Raspberry & Mint, Norfolk Sweet Pickle and Bloody Mary Relish for the 
savoury tooth: eight product lines in total, all made with ingredients sourced 
locally, even from their own gardens. The jams I tasted - Strawberry & Rose, 
Raspberry & Mint - were pure and true. The sugar didn't mask the fruit (the 
essential criteria by which to judge jam) and the herbal additions nicely 
pointed up the qualities of the main ingredient.

Aside from winning awards (Gold in the 2008 Great Taste Awards for Seville & 
Cranberry Marmalade), demand has stretched Penny's kitchen to bursting point, 
so they're moving operations to a barn offered by a local farmer. It may not 
have the romance of a domestic kitchen, but they won't be making their 
conserves any differently. Anyway, they don't want to grow too big - it would 
interfere too much with family life.

"We're not really empire builders," Penny says.

"And it wouldn't be so much fun," Sarah says.
