
The dilemma I am from the UK, but for the past 15 years have lived in 
Australia, and have created a family here. I am now in my 50s and as time goes 
on I find myself feeling increasingly detached with no roots. I keep wondering 
if we should move back. I wonder if it will be better for our children to be 
closer to family in the UK. I enjoy the Australian lifestyle and weather, which 
are the main reasons I came here, and work has always been plentiful. Why am I 
feeling like this now? Is it age – do we all yearn to return to our roots? Am I 
viewing life in the UK through rose-tinted glasses?

Mariella replies Definitely. Although I’m pretty sure if you’d stayed in the 
UK you’d have got those urges to be close to family under control quite some 
time ago. That said I totally understand the gravitational type pull towards 
the past as we grow older and I’m not quite sure how we resist it, or whether 
we should.


Related: So long and thanks for all the flat whites: an English view of 
Australia | Madhvi Pankhania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/11/so-long-and-thanks-for-all-the-flat-whites-an-english-view-of-australia>

If you’re looking to dodge nostalgia you’ve written to the wrong person. Also 
in my early 50s, I spent a week in July back in Connemara, where we holidayed 
as children, and on one idyllic sun-blessed day wound up on the tiny island 
where we still own the ruins of a cottage. Four decades slipped from my 
shoulders as I waded in the turquoise water, investigated rock pools with my 
children, showed them where I cut my knee open, where we caught giant crabs and 
the lake that miraculously (it seemed to us as kids), disappeared entirely in 
summer. Later in the local pub I revisited shared childhood memories with my 
friend Caroline, last seen when I was 10 years old and felt an irrational but 
no less overwhelming sense of homecoming.

There’s no question to me that life is a circle. The longer we last the closer 
we feel to our beginnings. And the harder it becomes to determine the sensory 
from the sensible in terms of what we’re feeling. It’s one of the rare 
occasions where my atheist convictions are seriously challenged. How cleverly 
conceived, and how benevolent to us as a species, that as we edge towards the 
end of our days, instead of looking forward with boundless enthusiasm we find 
ourselves slipping back to past memories. Just as the overwhelming protective 
love we feel for a child is watered down by troublesome teenage years before we 
can bear to let our offspring leave us, so our expectation of life dims as we 
approach the ultimate cul de sac. If that’s not intelligent design it’s a hell 
of a coincidence.

It’s no wonder, as you reach the halfway point, that your thoughts are 
drifting to your home country. It’s also, I suspect, a symptom of another less 
recognised contemporary advance. Once upon a time we thought we’d be dead by 
now, today we can anticipate another five decades, and how to spend them is a 
further dilemma!

I understand the pull towards the past as we get older. I’m not sure how we 
resist it, or whether we should

So, back to you, far off in the Antipodes feeling the tug of home and yearning 
for the comfort of family. The point at which these impulses, rooted in the 
past, become more of a tug is entirely subjective, often irrational and 
requires careful consideration before being acted upon.

You mention children and a husband, but give me no inkling what their feelings 
about being uprooted are. Family should be a democracy and such a major move 
would need tacit agreement from the majority, rather than a dictat from one 
member. I presume you’ve spoken to your husband about these feelings and are 
canvassing opinions from your kids? Would such a move require you to mount a 
propaganda campaign, or further consider the feelings of others?

A move from Australia to the UK would be one from an outdoor life to much more 
of an indoor existence, which, depending on your children’s ages, might be one 
from freedom to increased restriction, and as for schools, it’s anyone’s guess 
what will be on offer by the time this government has finished fiddling.

I could continue, but I’m sure you are aware of the practical considerations, 
or at least understand that you need to investigate them. So let’s return to 
that emotional force field. Recreating the past is impossible, relationships 
with parents, relations and friends all change over the years, and so returning 
is never an option. Instead you need to think about whether you’re ready to 
start a new life, in a place you’re already familiar with. You’d have the 
benefit of family close by as well as the aggravation of increased 
responsibilities as your own parents get older. Your compulsion to make major 
changes is not unique. A study byHigh50 <http://www.high50.com/> revealed that 
in your 50s you’re more likely to take risks, change career, come out, get 
divorced or start a new business, so you’re in the right decade. You just need 
to ensure they’re rationally considered and likely to enhance your life. Simply 
playing puppet to your heartstrings is never a good choice.

If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk>

Follow Mariella on Twitter @mariellaf1 
<https://twitter.com/mariellaf1?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
