
The news that Food from Britain is to be wound up by 2011 as a result of Defra 
ceasing its £5m annual funding may not bring a tear to the eyes of many 
readers. Indeed, you may not be aware of FFB's existence - it hasn't been 
exactly central to my life, and I sort of work in the business. Still, it seems 
odd that the organisation charged with supporting British food producers in 
their efforts to market their products overseas should be no more. It's hard to 
think of the French, Italian or Spanish, say, doing the same thing.

We're not talking small bananas here, either. Total UK food and drink exports 
from January to September 2006 were worth £7.4bn, up 4% on 2005; and of those, 
£4.9bn were to the EU, 5% up on the previous year. OK, much of that is taken up 
by the likes of soft drinks, confectionery and breakfast cereals, but products 
such as Tyrrells crisps, Artisan Biscuits of Ashbourne, Walkers shortbread and 
Quorn may all have had a far harder time whipping up interest overseas had it 
not been for FFB.

A Defra spokesman said, "This is not a priority area for Defra, and ministers 
felt that the money... could be used to better effect elsewhere." They also 
decided that Defra should no longer provide subsidised advice for businesses - 
another factor in the decision. But why not, if they benefit the British 
exchequer in the long term?

The trouble is, Defra has a problem with its maths (as well as with the 
bio-security at its laboratories). Twice it set budgets that included money it 
did not have; £230m, to be precise. So it's been a snip here and a snip there 
(canals, conserving rare birds and wetlands, research into animal diseases, 
plus 1,400 staff asking for voluntary redundancy), and with one of those snips, 
there goes FFB. I know someone who used to sit on the Civil Service Commission 
that interviews candidates. She said the bright ones went to the Treasury or 
Home Office, anywhere but the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries & Food, as 
Defra was then known - they got the leftovers, the ones who couldn't add up. 
Sure, Defra hasn't had it easy of late, what with outbreaks of foot-and-mouth, 
foot in mouth, bluetongue and flooding, but still, to take out one of the few 
agencies with experience of promoting our food abroad seems petty and 
shortsighted even by its standards.

In theory, FFB's support work will be handed over to Regional Food Groups, at 
least some of which are part-financed by EU agencies. Admirable though such 
organisations may be, I can't help but wonder what experience they have in 
promoting British produce overseas, let alone who, exactly, is responsible for 
a coordinated policy (assuming there is going to be one at all).

This may seem to be getting a bit off-topic, but it's all part of the same 
problem: our institutions simply don't value food highly. They take no pride in 
it. They don't see it, as the French, Italians and Spanish do, as a tool for 
promoting wider interests; they don't understand, as many of our councils do, 
how food can be an economic dynamo, how food can be the key to generating 
tourism and local interest in an area, and how one of the few areas of 
manufacturing that is flourishing is small-scale food producers.

We are actually beginning to change the appreciation of British foods abroad. 
Our wines pick up international awards. Our cheeses have been the stars of the 
great Slow Food cheese festival. The best of our seafood ends up in Spain and 
France. Even our chefs extol the virtues of home-grown breeds and varieties of 
fruit and vegetables. Which may be why our restaurant culture is no longer a 
laughing stock.

It's one thing to shoot yourself in the foot, quite another to shoot yourself 
in the bread basket. Oh well, plus ça change, plus c'est la même chose. That 
means one thing to the French and its opposite to the British.
