
Designers are often asked about blurring the boundary between inside and out, 
especially in urban plots, and the advent of huge, bi-folding glass doors that 
open up a house wall to the garden has created countless opportunities to do so.

Decking helps, too. It's the easiest material to use against the house to 
achieve a level threshold because, unlike solid paving, the void beneath will 
not compromise damp-proofing and lead to problems inside. Once flooring inside 
and out are level, they make both spaces feel connected. The lack of a doorsill 
also means there is nothing for children to trip over or for wheelchairs to 
overcome.

Elsewhere, the visual links between inside and out can be quite subtle. Like 
many kitchens, this one is based on rectangles, and in very broad terms 
comprises a series of boxes. It is these shapes and proportions that designers 
Modular Pro have carefully repeated in the garden; even the horizontal planes 
of work surfaces and shelves are echoed in the bench and the garden walls.

The use of colour is significant, with the predominant bright surfaces in the 
kitchen being taken outside, along with the natural colours of the wood and the 
dark tile. These also resonate with the back of the bench and - thanks to 
serendipity - with the dark shadows on interior walls and surfaces.

路 For continuity, decking should run in the same direction as internal 
floorboards, but don't worry about matching materials: they weather 
differently, and any timber outside will always turn grey

路 The kitchen table can easily be taken outside. It would look odd having two 
tables in such close proximity, and this solution is not only economical but 
also leaves the garden uncluttered When a certain shade of white is used inside 
the house, opt for a slightly darker shade outside if you are trying to achieve 
a match, because it will always appear to be brighter in natural light

路 The extension of this black mosaic strip from the house into the garden 
functions as a pared-down contemporary vista with the upstand at the end 
becoming a focal point

路 Evergreen planting is essential with large glass doors, because the garden 
must look good year round. Spiky phormiums, bamboo and this tree fern are among 
the architectural plants that suit this modern theme
