
Hackney council is recruiting to two key leadership roles in its children, 
adults and community health directorate. Anne Canning, acting group director 
talks about the challenges and opportunities the council’s new director of 
children and families and director of adults’ services will encounter, and 
describes some of the key skills and experience candidates will need to offer.

Give us a brief introduction to Hackney

Hackney is London’s most diverse, dynamic borough. It’s a vibrant fast-moving 
place that has come a long way in a short time and is now seen as a borough of 
rapid economic growth and change. With more green space than any other inner 
London borough, miles of waterways and first class schools and public services, 
it’s no wonder that Hackney has become one of London’s most popular places to 
live.

What’s going to attract people to these roles?

Working for a high profile local authority like Hackney can be career changing 
– and that’s particularly the case in children’s and adults’ services due to 
their track record and reputation. But whatever the borough has achieved in the 
past, it is continually looking forward and needs highly motivated people to 
guide the next chapter of innovation.

The borough has high levels of need in some of its communities. But our new 
directors will inherit many high performing services, particularly around areas 
such as child protection, reablement and day care. There’s a good track record 
of delivering solid services. Innovation and trying new things is fostered 
here. For both of these posts this is a chance to further develop that work and 
build on our successes.


The council has been something of a trailblazer for new ways of working around 
health and social care in recent years – something that has been recognised 
locally and nationally. We have successfully transformed services to our 
community and the innovation and creativity we have demonstrated has also 
inspired and influenced peers in local government throughout the country.


What are the main challenges for these roles?

The key task for both director posts is to continue the borough’s high 
standards of practice and adapt provision to reflect the changing nature of its 
varied communities. They will also need to guide both services as they embrace 
the national push towards prevention and early intervention. All this while 
dealing with growing financial pressures in a local authority that has seen one 
of the biggest budget cuts per capita in the country.

Hackney’s renowned children’s social care model, Reclaiming Social Work, 
reflects that ethos and has evolved since it was introduced eight years ago. 
The idea has been about developing the professionalism and status of social 
work and new ways of working. There are challenges but also a dedication to 
keep that progress and ethos going. Unlike many areas, the borough has retained 
its children’s centres and youth services and also has successful early help 
provision.


On the adults’ side, the challenge is to build on the success of high 
performing services such as reablement and day care while implementing the 
health and social care integration agenda being driven by government. We’re 
trying to move forward work that’s about enabling independence, doing more to 
keep people at home, independent and healthy. We have a good settlement with 
health and whoever comes in will be expected to continue that partnership 
working. Hackney has long been a testbed for new initiatives and ways of 
working and is one of five areas in London chosen to be a health and social 
care devolution pilot area. Initiatives like this keep Hackney in the spotlight 
and reflect the borough’s successful track record in trying out new ideas.


How would you sum up your message to candidates?

If you can offer a wholehearted commitment to working with others and a 
passion for making a lasting impact on people’s lives these are career-defining 
opportunities in London’s most diverse and creative borough. These roles demand 
professional credibility, founded on a track record of delivery in complex 
settings. Your operational know-how needs to be complemented by a strategic 
perspective that can inspire and facilitate new ways of working. If you have 
the vision to rethink how public services can be delivered, while building on 
existing good practice, Hackney is a place with the organisational and 
political commitment to make it happen.

To find out more about these roles and apply visit  
<http://www.hackneyleaders.co.uk>our website <http://www.hackneyleaders.co.uk>.


Content on this page is produced and paid for by Hackney council
