
Each year, like daddy-long-legs around a lamp or teenagers to a free-drinks 
party, music-lovers are drawn to festivals in muddy fields and on rainy 
beaches. There's something unique about the atmosphere at a festival. But the 
bliss is only temporary and before long you're back to real life, studying and 
counting down until the next time.

But what if you love festivals so much that you want to spend every second 
living, breathing and drinking in (OK, not literally) the mud, bands and the 
positivity of festival time? What if you're driven by wanting to give people a 
good time, and are looking for a career promoting music, arts and the feel-good 
freedom of a good festival?

If you pick the right degree, it could prepare you for a career in festival 
management, meaning you never have to leave the festival feeling behind.

It was only through studying an events management course at Bournemouth 
University that Felicity Forbes was able to slide comfortably into a position 
as event manager at Beach Break Live festival, a popular surfing and music 
festival in Newquay, headlined by Jake Bugg and AlunaGeorge last year.

She says: "Having a theoretical understanding of the role is important, 
especially in such a competitive market." Forbes is now working as staff and 
volunteer manager atIn The Woods <http://www.inthewoodsfestival.co.uk/> 
festival. She says her degree helped her to get where she is, but if she'd had 
the choice, she would have swapped her BA in events management to an even more 
focused one in festival management.

If, like Forbes, you're interested in working in festivals, there are a 
handful of degrees across the country that specialise in the subject.Southbank 
University 
<http://www.lsbu.ac.uk/courses/course-finder/arts-festival-management-ba-hons> 
andDe Montford University 
<http://www.dmu.ac.uk/study/courses/undergraduate-courses/arts-and-festivals-management-ba-degree/arts-and-festivals-management-ba.aspx>
 both provide a course in arts and festival management, Southampton Solent has 
an MA inmusic festival industries 
<http://www.solent.ac.uk/courses/2014/postgraduate/music-festival-industries-ma/course-details.aspx>
, Queen Margaret University has anMA in arts, festival and cultural management 
<http://www.qmu.ac.uk/courses/PGCourse.cfm?c_id=268>, and Bucks New University 
offers a BA inevent and festival management 
<http://bucks.ac.uk/courses/course/bm1efm1>.

"A degree in event and festival management gives you all the basic knowledge 
you need in every area of the event industry, from wedding planning, to venue 
managing to festivals," says Jessie Mitchell, a third-year student on the BA 
course at Bucks New University.

In the face of rising tuition fees you might be considering heading straight 
into work, or trying to find an apprenticeship that could lead into festival 
management. But undertaking a degree offers business knowledge and insight that 
can be hard to find elsewhere. You'll also be encouraged to think about the 
bigger picture when it comes to festivals.

"Making your event sustainable is one of the most important things to achieve 
as an event organiser and this year my modules have taught me to make my events 
socially, economically and environmentally sustainable," says Mitchell.

Taking into account the impact a festival can have on the world, Bucks New 
University is this year launching a new course – a Bsc in event and 
sustainability management.

Teresa Moore, head of the music and events management department at Bucks New 
University, says: "There's more and more demand for people who've got knowledge 
in making events sustainable – looking at the social, environmental and 
economic impact of festivals."

Environmental festival management is not just a good way to make a difference, 
but can be a creatively challenging career path. "Festivals are leading the way 
in testing out new ideas. One of the big things at the moment is how we can use 
less plastic – we need to come up with creative and innovative solutions."

A degree in festivals could lead you to meeting interesting people, and is a 
great way to bring attention to a wide range of music genres.

Mitchell says: "At the end of my second year, we went on placement where we 
had to do 100 hours work with a company. I did my placement withAuthentic Brazil
 <http://www.authenticbrazil.co.uk/index.php/en/> – a website and events 
company dedicated to Brazilian music and culture – and I met some amazing 
people and went to some fantastic locations."

It's this approach, of combining hands-on-experience with theoretical 
practice, that ensures completing a degree in festival management will really 
make a difference to your job prospects.

David Stevenson, program leader for MA arts, festival and cultural management 
at Queen Margaret University says a degree can give you the foundations for a 
successful career in festivals.

He says: "[Going straight into work] is certainly an option, but if you have 
never studied events management, it is often difficult to understand what is 
needed to learn on the job.

"A degree gives you the grounding that means you can hit the ground running 
and spend more time focusing on delivering an amazing experience for your 
audience and less time thinking about how to start creating a budget or the 
best way to recruit volunteers."

A degree can give you the knowledge, skills and awareness in the areas of 
management that you'd need to be familiar with to successfully set up a 
festival.

Stevenson says: "For example, what are the best ways in which to manage 
volunteers? How should you communicate the features and benefits of your event 
to potential sponsors? How do you market the benefits of an intangible 
experience, and how do you manage the relationship with artists?"

These are the kind of questions that you'll answer on a BA or MA programme 
that specialises in festivals.

What do you want to do when you grow up? It's a hard question to answer. But 
if you'd like to spend it doing something you enjoy, if you want the feeling of 
Glastonbury, Bestival, Reading or Leeds to last forever, then a degree in 
festival management could be your first step. Why should the festival come to 
an end?
 Guardian Students banner Photograph: guardian 