
David Cameron is being urged to respond to a remain victory in the EU 
referendum <http://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> by telling his 
fellow European leaders they must address immigration and the free movement of 
citizens if the popularity of the EU is not to plummet to unsustainable levels.

The call to look again at the detail of EU-wide free movement would also be a 
means for Cameron to acknowledge the depth of public disquiet in Britain over 
immigration that has been displayed throughout the referendum campaign.

Pro-EU ministers are determined to ensure the European commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> does not take the wrong 
lessons from a remain victory by seeing it as an endorsement of the status quo. 
They believe Cameron will have a unique mandate to urge EU leaders to listen to 
their electorates, or face the same “near-death experience” as the UK.
Referendum explained: the Guardian view 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/05/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=guardian_view>
Conservative party whips are also consulting MPs on whether a minister for 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> should be appointed to 
cabinet as part of a reshuffle that would occur after the referendum, probably 
in the autumn. The appointment would be a sign that Cameron is determined to 
engage with the European agenda with new intensity ahead of the UK presidency 
of the EU in 2017. The presidency provides a chance for the UK to shape the 
European agenda and is likely to focus on competitiveness.

The current longstanding Europe minister, David Lidington, serves as a 
minister of state and is responsible for relations with the EU and Russia.

The prime minister will have to return to the EU in the aftermath of the 
referendum to complete the details of his February deal, including unresolved 
details about the level of social security benefits and the length of time they 
can be withheld from people moving to the UK from the EU.

Cameron has tried to raise wider discussions of free movement with his fellow 
EU leaders, but was rebuffed mainly by Germany, which insisted free movement 
was an absolute sacrosanct principle.

Some in Downing Street believe that after succeeding in a referendum, he would 
have the authority to reopen the discussion, and urge a debate on reform. Both 
Germany and France face elections in 2017, and both campaigns are likely to be 
dominated by possible EU treaty reform.

The prospect of a new debate on free movement was raised on Wednesday by Simon 
Fraser, the former permanent secretary at the foreign office, who said: “If we 
do vote to stay in, is there a realistic prospect in the period afterwards that 
we could engage with other member states in a discussion about how we manage 
the principle of freedom of movement without undermining that principle as part 
of the single market? It does seem to me not only in this country, but 
elsewhere in Europe this is a a highly sensitive issue.

Related: David Cameron points to risk of Scotland leaving UK after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/david-cameron-raises-risk-scotland-leaving-uk-after-brexit>

“If we were able to have that discussion and debate that might be a way of 
easing the pressure off this very sensitive question.”

Speaking at a seminar organised by the European Council on Foreign Relations 
<http://www.ecfr.eu/>, he said: “I am talking more broadly about the management 
of the union as it now stands. One of things people are saying to me at the 
moment is not only the number of people coming to this country from the 
enlargement states of 2004 but also the number of people who are now coming in 
to find jobs because of youth unemployment in longstanding members of the EU.”

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, is opposed to any fresh immigration 
restrictions, but the former shadow chancellor Ed Balls is one of many party 
figures calling for a debate on restricting the movement of low-skilled labour 
within the EU.

The former shadow education minister Tristram Hunt said: “I do think after the 
referendum it might be time for an area of British leadership to open up this 
discussion and see what options are available. If we don’t talk about 
immigration and if we don’t address it, and continue to say there is only one 
way and there are no other political solutions, then the debate goes in far 
more reactionary directions.”

The former Polish foreign minister Radosław Sikorski also urged the UK to take 
the diplomatic initiative in the wake of any vote to remain. He said: “You are 
not the most important member of the club committee if the club is one that you 
might leave. So British influence has not been what it has been.”

He added: “The bill is becoming due for decades of Eurosceptic brainwashing in 
sections of the press.”
