
We met at a wedding of mutual friends: an outdoor mishmash of English and 
Scottish, traditional and unique. After the ceremony you asked me the way to 
the portable toilets and I took you to the appropriate field myself. We 
discovered en route that we had both brought the same dish to add to the 
wedding buffet. This sparked a friendly rivalry that drew a dotted line between 
us for the remainder of the day. Later, I would triumphantly show you a photo 
proving that while only one of my lemon possets was left, a pile of yours still 
sat on the table, next to some crumbling carrot cake and some shortbread.

I’m not sure how long we talked, interspersed as the day was with dancing and 
speeches and other people. I certainly didn’t learn much about your life and I 
wonder now why I didn’t ask more about your job or your student days or what 
music you love. I just remember that you seemed open and kind and that you made 
me laugh.

I don’t even recall what we were discussing when a sudden, ridiculous thought 
came to me. Maybe it was the influence of our surroundings, the fact we were 
both alone at a lovely wedding full of couples or the free-flowing champagne. 
Whatever it was, I definitely felt it: you’re my One.

Even though I don’t believe that people have a One. Even though we’d barely 
met and I’m old enough to know better. Anyway, while we might both have been 
alone that day, it was temporary. I’m married and you are in a long-term 
relationship.

As the night wore on, the oldest and youngest wedding guests gradually 
disappeared and a group of us moved into the tipi to sing songs around the 
fire. We barely spoke again, you and I, seated across from each other in the 
flickering light. You spent an age holding a marshmallow over the flames, 
passing it to me once it was perfectly toasted. Then it was 3am and universally 
bedtime. I left with friends in the pitch black, stumbling through a horse’s 
field and along the river path. You tracked me down and sent a message, 
checking that I’d got home OK.

We messaged on and off over the next few days, bonding over a shared love of 
music. I reprimanded you when you said that me eating that marshmallow was the 
sexiest thing you’d seen in ages. Secretly I was pleased and flattered. You 
won’t know this but my marriage has, so far, been a struggle and I felt like 
you “saw” me almost immediately. I can’t recall having that connection with 
anyone else.

The messages fizzled out and I grew desperate to see you again, but we live 
hundreds of miles apart: there was no way to orchestrate an accidental meeting. 
The wedding was five months ago now and I’m embarrassed to admit that you are 
still in my thoughts every day. But I’ve grown wary of my feelings, unsure 
whether they are born of a real connection or simply the desire for something 
exciting and extraordinary to daydream about rather than facing my reality. 
Perhaps if we met again I would feel none of this, only a bit foolish for 
allowing my daydreams to overtake rational thought.   

If I wasn’t married, and you were single, and there was no risk of you 
thinking I am a little bit crazy, I would like to tell you what an impact you 
had on me that day. Just so you knew. Have you thought of me at all? I can see 
that your girlfriend is beautiful and you have two cats; there’s a good chance 
you are completely content – I hope you are. If nothing else, I’d like to thank 
you for making that wedding such a delight to attend on my own, for helping to 
reignite my love of playing and listening to music, and for the tip about 
trying black pepper with lemon posset.

Yours, the Semi-Professional Wedding Attender
